
     
     
    the project gutenberg ebook of the cruel murder of mina miller  by unknown 
     
    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
    whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or re use it under the terms of 
    the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
    www gutenberg org   if you are not located in the united states  you ll have 
    to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook  
     
    title  the cruel murder of mina miller 
     
    author  unknown 
     
    release date  december           ebook         
     
    language  english 
     
    character set encoding  utf   
     
        start of this project gutenberg ebook the cruel murder of mina miller     
     
     
     
     
    produced by the online distributed proofreading team at 
    http   www pgdp net  images courtesy of cornell university 
    law library  trial pamphlets collection  
     
     
     
     
     
     
    

     

  the cruel murder  
of  
mina miller  
by  
kenkouwsky  alias  kettler 

     

     

wedded and murdered within an hour 

the cruel murder  
of  
mina miller  
by  
kenkouwsky  alias  kettler  

     

the guttenberg hoboken tragedy 

     

a thrilling and remarkable case  which  
recalls the murder of mary rodgers   
 the segar girl   which took place on  
the same spot  the scene of other  
murders of a like character 

     

the only life of mina miller published

     

barclay   co   publishers   
   north seventh street  philadelphia  pa 

     

agents wanted at all times 

     

entered according to act of congress  in the year       by  
barclay   co    
in the office of the librarian of congress  at washington  d  c 

the mina muller murder 

     

   murdered by her husband of an hour 

     

on friday morning  the   th of last may  a german  whose purpose was to gather
green leaves to sell to florists in n  y  city  entered the path leading from
bergen avenue  in the district known as bull s ferry  north of weehawken  he
had followed it eastward toward the river about     feet  and had turned aside
to the right about twenty feet  when he was appalled by almost stepping upon
the dead body of a woman  he hurried away to inform the police 

early in the afternoon coroner wiggins  of hoboken  visited the spot and made
a careful examination  he judged that the woman had not been over    years
old  along the top of the head  on the left side  was a deep gash  and beneath
it the skull was fractured  there was another gash over the right eye  both of
these gashes were apparently made with the edge of a stone  the nose was
broken in the middle  the right side of the head had apparently been crushed
by a stone  the left ear was injured as if an ear ring had been torn from it 
search was made for the missing ear ring  but it was not found  her face had
become blackened by the sun  which shone upon the spot where the body lay  the
features were small and symmetrical  she wore number one or number two
buttoned shoes 

an investigation was at once begun by the coroner  but without much success 

on the   th the young woman was completely identified as mrs  philomena
muller  the wife of simon muller  a tobacconist  at     west   thirtieth
street  n  y  mr  muller called at the morgue at   o clock on the afternoon of
may   th  in company with a lady whom he introduced as miss maria schmidt  his
wife s sister  he said they desired to look at the body  they were led into
the damp vault  and at sight of the body miss schmidt was overcome  and she
retired to the adjoining basement  mr  muller gazed upon the body calmly  the
jewelry and clothing of the dead woman were shown to him  and he positively
identified them as the property of his wife  he said that he had given her the
cameo brooch  mr  muller said that some time ago his wife deserted him  and
since then she had not lived with him  miss schmidt had seen her sister about
two weeks before  mrs  muller then informed her that she had found a decent
man  who was going to marry her and take her to germany in the steamer
l amerique  which was to sail on the  th of may  when miss schmidt told mr 
muller of this he went to the wharf of the transatlantic steamship company on
the morning of may  th  and remained at the gang plank of the vessel until all
the passengers had gone aboard  he was certain that his wife was not among
them  but he did not know her paramour 

before this identification was made  the authorities of hudson county had
obtained conclusive evidence of the fact that the murdered woman was mrs 
philomena muller  and that her assassin had married her on the morning of the
day on which he killed her  and had taken passage on the following day for
europe  as mrs  finck  the wife of an alehouse keeper in pierce avenue  west
new york  was sitting in her saloon on the afternoon of tuesday  the  d of
may  a man and a woman entered and sat down at a table  the woman ordered
drinks  and called for a glass of beer  her companion drank soda water  while
they were there the woman talked almost incessantly  she said that they came
from morrisania  she seemed to have plenty of money  when she paid for the
refreshments  mrs  finck noticed a large roll of bank notes in her pocketbook 
besides some silver and gold  before going away  the woman borrowed a
corkscrew to open a bottle of rhine wine which she had with her  she said she
had bought the bottle in union hill  mrs  finck minutely described the woman 
and the description tallied exactly with that of the woman who was murdered 
prosecutor mcgill was so impressed with the accuracy of mrs  finck s
description  that he specially detailed detectives swinton and fanning to
trace the movements of the unknown couple  they began their search on tuesday
evening  may   th  and wednesday the   th they submitted to the prosecutor a
circumstantial account of their discoveries 

   they began by looking for the person from whom the bottle of rhine wine had
been purchased  every saloon along the boulevard and the hackensack plank road
was visited  but to no purpose  continuing their inquiries  they entered an
inn kept by edward stabel  on the weaverstown road  when they questioned him
he said he remembered that on the day indicated by them a woman had called at
his place and asked for a bottle of rhine wine  as he did not have any he sent
his granddaughter  lizzie haas  to mr  eberling s store  in bergenline avenue 
for a bottle of it  while the girl was absent the woman chatted pleasantly
with stabel  she told him  among other things  that she had just been married
by the rev  mr  mabon  the pastor of the grove reformed dutch church  and that
she wanted the wine to celebrate the event  and to treat the minister  she
also said that she was about to sail for france  when the girl came back with
the bottle of wine the woman paid her fifty cents for it  and gave her ten
cents additional out of a    gold piece that stabel changed for her  on
leaving the saloon the woman was joined by a man  stabel could not recollect
anything in particular about the man  except that he had stood outside on the
street while the woman bought the wine  but he gave a very accurate
description of the woman and her dress  which tallied both with mrs  finck s
description of the woman she had seen  and with that of the murdered woman 
mrs  stabel furnished additional details  she said the woman came to the
saloon on the  d of may  she was sure of the date  because on the same day
there was a burial in the grove church cemetery which is only a short distance
from the inn  the woman told mrs  stabel of her marriage  and explained that
it had been secretly performed  because her brother disliked her husband  and
had objected to the match  she also said that she had been married once
before  and had attended a cigar store which her former husband kept in n  y 
city  mrs  stabel s circumstantial description of the woman tallied yet more
accurately than her husband s with that of the murdered woman 

the detectives then went to the parsonage of the grove reformed dutch church 
where they found the rev  dr  mabon  he recollected having married a couple on
may  d  the woman  he said  entered his residence alone  leaving the man in
the yard  where he paced up and down as if absorbed in meditation  the woman
asked mr  mabon if he would perform a marriage  and upon being told yes  she
went out and returned immediately with the man  as the couple had not provided
a witness  the clergyman called in john schuman  a barber in union street 
union hill    the man and woman made satisfactory replies to the usual
questions  and they were married in legal form  after the ceremony they
subscribed the following record of the marriage  which is now in mr  mabon s
possession 

  on tuesday  may          louis kettler  single  aged     bricklayer by
occupation  and residence      second avenue  new york  married to mina
schmidt  single  aged     residence       third avenue  new york  father of
bridegroom  louis kettler  father of bride  anastasius schmidt  both of the
contracting parties were born in katenheim  germany 

the woman did most of the talking  and seemed to be in excellent spirits  she
exhibited a bulky pocketbook  and asked mr  mabon how much his charge was  he
replied that she might pay him whatever she thought proper  as she had no
small bills she went out to get change  and came back presently with the money
and a bottle of rhine wine  which she offered to the clergyman  when he
refused it she tried to persuade him to take a drink  but he declined  and 
after a few more words  the strange couple quitted the parsonage  mr  mabon
could not recollect anything about the dress of either of the parties  but his
colored servant girl told the detectives that she had particularly noticed the
man as he was striding up and down the garden  and acting as if his mind was
troubled  she said he was stout  with a full face and dark moustache  and wore
a high  flat topped derby hat 

mrs  sarah rigler  who lives in the neighborhood of the church  saw the couple
before their marriage  they came along the road  and the woman stopped and
asked mrs  rigler 

 can you please direct me to a priest  

 do you want a priest or a minister   mrs  rigler inquired 

 i want a protestant priest   the woman responded   i am going to be married 
and i want him to marry us  

mrs  rigler s description of the woman was almost precisely the same as mrs 
stabel s  the man  she said  was quiet  and did not say anything in her
hearing  when the couple were last seen by the people in the neighborhood of
the church they were walking together toward west new york by a road that led
in the direction of finck s saloon and the guttenberg ferry 

       images i   a jpg 

martin kenkouwsky

       images i   b jpg 

mina muller 

the detectives next went to      third avenue  n  y  city  the number that had
been given to mr  mabon by the bride as her residence  there they were unable
for a long time to find any trace of mina schmidt  finally the daughter of the
janitor remembered that a woman answering   miss schmidt s description had
been living at service with a family in the house  but the family had moved 
and the servant had gone with them  an expressman named body had taken away
her trunks  after a tedious search body was found  the young woman whose
trunks he had removed proved not to have been the murdered woman  but body
said that about the  st of may a woman whom he knew as mrs  mina muller
offered to sell him some articles of furniture  as she was about to move  they
were unable to agree on the price  mrs  muller returned shortly afterward and
left an order to have an express wagon call for her baggage at      second
avenue  where she was then staying  body sent william norke  one of his
drivers  to the place  and the man received from mrs  muller four trunks  a
bundle of bedding  and a valise  which  by her directions  he carried to
theodore scherrer s hotel  at     christopher street  body and norke described
mrs  muller  and the detectives were satisfied that she was the woman who 
under the name of mina schmidt  was married by mr  mabon in the grove church 
a man whom the driver did not know  but who  from his appearance  he believed
to have been the murderer  superintended the transfer of her packages  and
rode in the wagon with norke to the hotel  on the way there he told norke that
he intended soon to sail for europe 

at      second avenue  whither the detectives next proceeded  they found a
german woman named mrs  schwan  who keeps a dyeing establishment  she did not
know any man named kettler  but she said that a man who answered in every
respect the description of kettler had lived in the house  but had moved about
the first of may  he had lived  she said  with a young widow  to whom she had
heard he was married  mrs schwan described the woman  and again the
description tallied with that of the murdered woman  mrs  schwan had been told
that the woman had another husband living in thirty ninth street  charles
rost  the landlord  said that on march  d mrs  muller had engaged three rooms 
front  on the top floor  and had furnished them comfortably  she told rost
that she was working for hahn  the butcher  in third avenue  her husband  mr 
muller  she said  had died of consumption  and had left her        insurance
on his life  she was away all day as a rule  and returned to her apartments in
the evening 

 one day   said mr  rost   about five weeks after she came here  i had
occasion to go to the roof  her room door was wide open  and mrs  muller was
at work within fixing up her curtains and arranging her room  i said to her in
fun 

    you ought to have a husband here  mrs  muller  

  oh  i ve got one   she said   my name is mrs  kettler now  i m not mrs 
muller any longer    she said  too  that her new husband was a mason 
kalsominer and paper hanger  and was getting good wages  a few days after that
mr  rost met him in the hallway of the house for the first time  and asked if
he lived there  he also told kettler that he believed mrs  muller had another
husband living  his suspicions had been excited by the woman s talk of her
dead husband and her inconsistent lack of mourning attire or demeanor  on may
 nd  they sold their furniture  and moved their trunks and bedding  no one
then knew whither   the man   said mrs  rost   was a greenhorn   and this was
the testimony of others in the building who had noticed him 

among the persons by whom the woman had been employed was moise hahn  a
butcher in third avenue  he said that she worked for him until may  st  when
she quitted  as she intended to go to europe  she was then living with a
foreigner whose name hahn did not know  but whose description corresponded
with that of the groom in the marriage ceremony in mr  mabon s house  she told
hahn that she was going with him to mulhausen in alsace 

mr  scherrer of scherrer s hotel at     christopher street  to which place
norke had carried the trunks and bundles belonging to the woman who gave her
name as mina miller  informed the detectives that on monday evening  may    a
german went there with an express wagon containing four trunks  a bundle of
bedding  and a valise 

 the man   scherrer said   afterwards introduced a woman who he said was his
wife  she was very talkative and had all the money and paid all the bills  the
man told me that they were going to sail in the steamship l amerique on the
 th inst   and were going to mulhausen  in alsace  on the day they came to my
place the man  who said his name was kettler  left the trunks here  but spent
the night at mr  boker s place  two doors further down the street  on monday 
may    mr  and mrs  kettler and i had a long chat about the old country  and
about noon they left my place and went to the direction of the christopher
street ferry  mrs  kettler promised my wife that she would come back to bid us
good by  late on tuesday night mr  kettler returned alone  i asked him where
his wife was  and he said she had gone to spend the night at her sister s
house  and was to meet him on board the steamship in the morning  he seemed to
me to be very much excited and uneasy  and his behaviour struck me at   the
time as peculiar  the next morning he had his trunks sent to the steamship
wharf  and went away  that is the last i saw of him  

louis groth keeps a lager beer saloon in thirty ninth street  near ninth
avenue  a friend of his living at      second avenue  in the same house with
mrs  muller  told groth of her being there with kettler  groth told mr 
schmidt  mrs  muller s brother  who lives at     ninth avenue  and he informed
mr  muller of his wife s whereabouts 

mr  schmidt was at his home at     ninth avenue last evening  he told our
reporter who called that he saw his sister for the last time on the sunday
before the murder  previous to that  upon the information from louis groth
that she was living with kettler in second avenue  he saw her there  and
remonstrated with her  he also had a talk with kettler  who  however  said
nothing of any proposed marriage  he said  however  that he knew muller 
muller told schmidt that he didn t know kettler  schmidt says that when his
sister mina called at his house on sunday she got a bank book containing    
which he had been keeping for her  and told him that she had sold her
furniture  and had altogether       she was going to marry kettler on tuesday 
may    and go with kettler to alsace  which was his former home  her brother
says he told her he did not want her to marry again while she had a husband 
but she said she was determined to do so 

mr  schmidt has a brother august  a musician  living at    avenue a  and two
sisters now living one of whom is married  muller  he says  was attentive to
the unmarried sister  and mrs  muller and he continually quarrelled about this
intimacy  their disputes were so violent as to attract the attention of the
people in the house where they lived in thirty ninth street  and once mr 
muller was badly whipped  it is reported  by some friends of mrs  muller 

muller and his wife were married in       and lived for three and a half years
in the house at     west thirty ninth street  muller made cigars and kept a
small store there  when he and his wife could stand each other no longer  said
mr  schmidt  they separated  and mrs  muller for a while lived in a house in
the same block  about three months previous to the murder she left the
neighborhood and secured employment in the butcher shop of moise heahn in
third avenue  muller sold his store out on april    and removed to his present
place in thirtieth street  mr  schmidt said that kettler  after marrying his
sister  undoubtedly led her to the lonely place of the murder for the sole
purpose of   killing and robbing her of the      which she had  and the gold
watch and chain 

as mrs  muller left her brother s house on sunday she said to the saloon 
keeper on the ground floor   i ve got another man a nice man now and i m all
right again  

kettler had been only seven months in this country 

attorney general stockton directed mr  mcgill to telegraph to the authorities
at havre  describing kettler  and requesting his arrest on a charge of murder 
detective edward stanton was to sail for europe on saturday in pursuit of the
murderer  but subsequent events proved this unnecessary  as the reader will
learn by following this complete and dramatic recital 

     

   tracked and arrested 

  wildly declaring his innocence  yet admitting that he was in hoboken with
the murdered woman  she led me astray  a very touching scene with his wife 

  m  images drop m png 

martin kenkouwsky  alias louis kettler  the murderer of mrs  mina muller  was
captured on the night of may   th        by policemen morris fitzgerald and
richard tregonning of the thirty seventh street police station  as he was
walking in thirty sixth street  near tenth avenue  new york city  the clue
which led to his detection was discovered and followed out almost to the end
by gustavus a  seide  a reporter for a jersey city newspaper  and compares  as
a piece of amateur detective work  with the detection of chastine cox  the
murderer of mrs  hull  seide recognized that there was a flaw in the theory
that the alleged murderer had gone to europe in the amerique  there was no
certainty that the baggage which was taken from sherrer s house on the day the
steamer sailed was delivered at the pier of the french line  nor was there
positive evidence that kettler himself had been seen on the pier that morning 
superintendent west of the french pier said that on the day the amerique
sailed  a man answering somewhat kettler s description had applied to him for
a ticket  and he had referred him to the purser    baggage corresponding to
what kettler was supposed to have taken with him the superintendent had not
seen on the pier 

seide came over to new york early thursday morning  may   th  and proceeded at
once to look for the man who was supposed to have taken kettler s baggage from
scherrer s hotel to the pier  scherrer had seen the man in the neighborhood
quite frequently  but did not know his name or where he kept  he  however 
described him to seide as a tall  well built man  with dark moustache and dark
complexion  the reporter started out  and visited the truck stands between
christopher and twentieth streets  but could not find his man  returning to
scherrer s  he found a man  whom he describes as a  dilapidated individual  
taking a drink at the bar  seide again asked scherrer for a description of the
truckman  scherrer gave it as before  adding that he drove a red truck with
one brown horse  here the  dilapidated individual  spoke up and said  the
truckman might be found at christopher and bleecker streets  on inquiring
there seide learned that he changed his stand a few days before  but where he
had gone no one in the immediate vicinity could tell  he  however  discovered
that his name was c  a  strang  he then made inquiries for strang s
whereabouts in various smithies and liquor stores  and in one of the latter he
ascertained that strang lived in greenwich street  on the west side  a few
doors below christopher street 

at this point seide telegraphed over to detective stanton of the new jersey
force  and awaited his arrival  then they went to strang s house  where mrs 
strang informed them that her husband was at the new market  corner of west
and gansvoort streets  there they found him  they asked him if  on the morning
of the sailing of the amerique  he had taken baggage belonging to kettler to
the steamship wharf  he replied that he had not  he had taken the baggage to a
mrs  clifford s  at     charles street  and about ten days afterward he had
removed the valise and three ordinary yellow trunks to     west thirty sixth
street  the other trunk  which was long and black  he had not seen again  he
was not sure whether he had taken the first load on the  d or  th instant  he
at first refused to go with them to the house in charles street  saying he was
too busy  but when seide and stanton offered to pay him for his time  he
consented 

mrs  clifford said that a man answering kettler s description had come to the
house either on the  d or  th inst   and she remembered that strang had
brought a valise and four trunks  kettler had remained at   the house about
ten days  paying her regularly  once he paid her with a five dollar gold
piece  she did not notice anything peculiar or restless in his behaviour  he
kept to the house pretty closely  though he was generally out nights  she saw 
however  that he read the newspapers very closely  he told her that he was
going to california  when asked if on his departure he had taken all his
baggage  she said  no  he had left a long black trunk  which they would find
in the wood shed  they opened the trunk  and found it full of crockery and
cooking utensils  they carried it to strang s truck  and directed strang to
carry it to the house in thirty sixth street  to ask for kettler  and if
kettler was there  to give them a sign  as they would remain outside  strang
inquired for kettler  but was told that no man of that name lived there  but
that a man corresponding to the description lived one flight up with a wife
and two children  strang took the trunk up stairs  and found a woman  a young
boy  and a little girl in the room designated  the woman said the trunk
belonged to martin kenkouwsky  her husband  and offered to pay fifty cents for
its delivery  strang then signalled to seide and stanton that the man was not
in  and the reporter and detective went to an adjoining house  and received
permission to watch from the windows  seide went out again to speak to strang 
and while he was talking to him in front of     west thirty sixth street  both
were arrested by policeman tregonning  the police of capt  washburn s precinct
had been looking for the same man  and had traced him to this same house  this
was the cause of the arrest of seide and strang  when they got to the station 
seide explained to the captain who he was  and the captain sent him back with
a policeman to get stanton to identify him  at first they couldn t find
stanton  and the policeman wanted to take seide back  in the meantime the
captain had sent policeman fitzgerald to aid tregonning in arresting
kenkouwsky  the policemen  seide  and stanton  who had meanwhile relieved
seide of his embarrassment  waited for about three hours  when they saw a man
answering the description of the murderer walking up the street  policeman
fitzgerald arrested him  he offered no resistance  and his only exclamation
was in german   was ist  was ist  was ist   he was at once taken to the
station  where he was locked up  sergeant brown was sent down for scherrer 
and a policeman was despatched for strang  scherrer arrived about twenty
minutes after the arrest  and identified the prisoner as the man who had been
at his house under the name of kettler  strang also soon appeared  and he too
identified kettler  meanwhile policemen had   entered the room at     west
thirty sixth street  notified the woman of her husband s arrest  and taken the
four trunks and the valise to the station  our reporter was present when the
trunks were opened  almost the first thing found when one of the yellow trunks
was opened was a letter addressed to mrs  mina muller      west thirty ninth
street  in a corner of the envelope was printed  germania lodge  no      k  of
h   it contained a request for her to attend a lodge meeting on jan      the
trunks were full of articles of female attire  and in one of them was a pair
of men s gloves of white leather  stained with dirt and badly torn  as though
whoever wore them had been handling some rough object  it is thought that
kenkowski wore these gloves when he was married and when he crushed mina
muller s skull with stones  a gray wrapper  and a straw bonnet and table
covers were among the other objects found 

       images i   a jpg 

marriage ceremony which took place an hour before the murder 

       images i   b jpg 

murdering mina muller in the woods north of weehawken 

at about half past   the prisoner s wife arrived at the station with her boy 
who was crying bitterly  she asked why her husband had been arrested  and why
the trunks had been taken away  when asked what his name was  she replied 
 martin kenkouwski   and added that they had been married ten years ago in
alsace  and had only been in this country a little more than half a year  her
husband was a mason and kalsominer  when asked if he had been at home
regularly lately  she said he had been away about ten days in the beginning of
the month 

 do you know   asked the interpreter  the woman and her husband spoke in
german    that he married another woman  and killed her  

 i don t believe it   she replied firmly  while the boy cried more loudly than
before   i don t believe it   she reiterated   let me see him  don t cry my
child   turning to the boy    or you will make me weep  don t cry   here her
voice faltered  and she burst into tears 

she was then led to the cell  here a heart rending scene occurred  she threw
herself with her child against the grating  sobbing and calling for her
husband  he was far back in the cell  and when he heard her and the child  he
shrieked from out of the darkness 

 katrina  katrina  merciful heavens  my child  my child  great god  are you
here  

then he rushed forward to the cell door  pressed his face against the iron
trellis work  lifted his hands and called out   before god i stand a guiltless
man  and if i die i die guiltless  i was misled by the wicked woman  she led
me astray  my god  katrina  katrina  give me your hand  

   here he thrust his hand through the cell gate  and his wife clasped it  she
was too much overcome to speak for a while  and the child moaned and sobbed 
kenkouwski continued reiterating his innocence  when he called out again   the
wicked woman misled me  she led me astray  

his wife exclaimed   have i not been a good wife  have i not prayed to god for
you   then she sobbed again  after a while she said to him   i don t believe
you killed her  i don t believe it   after this she and the child were led
away  and he called after them   by god  katrina  i am innocent  i am
innocent  

the woman said he had always been a good husband to her  nor did she seem to
know anything of mina muller  she said nothing when asked what she had thought
when her husband came back with three yellow trunks after an absence of ten
days 

shortly after the woman left  kenkouwski was led before the sergeant for
examination  he looked wild and nervous  and gesticulated violently   he must
be watched well to night   said one of the policemen   or he ll hang himself  
as he approached the desk  he suddenly threw up his arms and exclaimed 

 now  i will tell you the truth  if it is not the truth you may take a knife
and cut my throat  like this    here he pulled his finger across his neck  
 mina schmidt told me the other day that she knew i was married  but she
wanted me to marry her and go to germany with her  where she had very good
parents living  at that time i didn t know she was married  we went to
guttenberg to get married  and when we got over there we went to the schutzen
park  two men there came up to me and told me that she did not love me  that
she loved another  when she heard this she sprang up and ran away from me  and
i have not seen her since  

he was then led back to his cell  he was again brought from his cell at about
   o clock to be looked at by the reporters assembled in the thirty seventh
street station  he had been lying down  and the light dust from the cell floor
covered his back  he looked in a bewildered manner at the throng about him 
spoke a few words in german  reasserting what he had previously said in regard
to the murder  and was taken back again  his eyes were bloodshot  and he spoke
in a nervous manner 

 mon dieu  mon dieu   exclaimed kenkouwsky   does any one speak french 

 i do   replied another reporter  addressing him in french 

   kenkouwsky sprang from his seat and  with tears falling fast  seized the
reporter by the hand and said   tell them that as our saviour  who was
crucified  was innocent  so am i  

 of what   asked the reporter 

 of the murder of mina schmidt  i married her that day  although i have a wife
here  she told me she loved me  i did not tell her i was married  after we
were married we went to schuetzen park  there we sat at a table drinking  when
two men came by  they greeted mina as old friends  and we all drank together 
one of the men took her away  and the other then told me that mina had said
that she did not love me  they all left me  and i  after hunting for them 
came back to this city and tried to find her  

chief of police donovan of hoboken  who had been standing by all this time and
listening to what the reporter quickly translated  touched the reporter on the
shoulder and said   ask him if he was not in jersey city last night  

the reporter asked the question  kenkouwsky staggered back and repeated 
 jersey city  jersey city  where is that   the reporter repeated the question 

kenkouwsky replied   i was with my wife last night  

 in jersey city   asked the reporter 

 no  i was with a woman there  

chief donovan s eyes brightened  and he then said   last monday a young girl 
whose name i cannot now mention  was taken into a house by this man  he made
her drink wine  and as she was partly stupefied  he locked the doors and
assaulted her  it was for this offence that i and my detectives were hunting
him up to day  we did not then suspect that he was the murderer of mrs 
schmidt  last night he was to meet another girl  but she became frightened and
did not stay where he told her to until he came  he eluded us by ten minutes  

in the prisoner s pocket was found a clipping from a german paper of the
account of the hanging of mrs  meierhoffer and her paramour last winter  to
the reporter he said he had not read any account of the guttenberg murder
until the day previous to his arrest 

at midnight chief donovan had the trunks of mrs  mina schmidt taken over to
hoboken 

detective stanton told our reporter that an empty watch case had been found in
the room at     west thirty sixth street  on the yellow trunks labels were
pasted with the address 

  

monsieur joseph reymann 

no     rue clissant 

paris  france  

the purpose of this address was  it is supposed  to induce scherrer to believe
that he was to take the french steamer 

seide says he has ascertained that on monday night  may    kenkouwsky applied
at becker s hotel in christopher street  for a room  but refused to write his
name  the entry is in the hotel clerk s hand   louis kettler  room no     

coroner wiggins began an inquest in the case in hoboken on the afternoon of
may   th  simon muller  the husband of the murdered woman  testified   coroner
wiggins told me on wednesday that my wife had been found murdered in
guttenberg  i told him that it could not be so  for that she had gone to
germany with a man from alsace  i went to the french steamship wharf on the
day i heard they were to sail  and watched for her until the ship sailed  but
she did not come  i was married to her five years ago  our married life was
unhappy  and on the  th of last january she left me  she had then between    
and       

carl schmidt  the brother of the murdered woman  testified   i last saw my
sister philomina at my place      ninth avenue  new york  she came to my house
on sunday  may    at about   o clock in the afternoon  she told me she was
going with a man named louis kettler to mulhausen  in alsace  i asked her why
she was going  she replied that kettler was well off at home   you know   she
said   what treatment i have had from my husband   i told her that i knew he
did not treat her right  but that she should not go with this man  as she did
not know him at all  and further  i told her that she must first get a
separation from muller before she could go with another man  she answered   i
don t care how it will result  i will go with him  my husband tried to shoot
me   she also told me that she had known kettler for four weeks  and he had
told her that he had property in mulhausen  and that he would give her a good
home there  kettler  she said  was richer than the whole schmidt family  she
left me at about    o clock to go to my other sister s house in tenth avenue 
between nineteenth and twentieth streets  i never saw kettler but once  and
that was on a sunday in april in second avenue  near seventy ninth street  in
my sister s apartments  on may  nd a cousin of my wife met kettler on the
street and asked him when he and mina were going to europe  he replied that he
was not going to europe  the cousin then asked what mina would do  and he said
she would go to the country  where she had friends to stay with  kettler then
suggested that the cousin   and he should go off together  and leave mina
behind  since the  rd of may  on the  th or   th of the month  i think  the
woman sacks saw louis kettler passing up on the opposite side of the street 
when she noticed him she called my wife  who was in the room with her  to the
window  

the rev  dr  mabon  the pastor of the grove reformed dutch church  on the
weavertown road  at whose house the murdered woman and kettler were married 
testified that he had performed the ceremony 

 when i asked the man   he said   if he took the woman for his lawful wife  he
answered  yes   and at the time i noticed a tear in his eye  

the inquest was suddenly adjourned on the news of the murderer s arrest in n 
y  city 

     

   threatening to lynch him 

  the scene at his parting from his wife and children angry throngs in
hoboken giving away the murdered woman s watch the testimony 

  o  images drop o png 

over in new york martin kenkowsky was closely watched  he was so agitated when
he was led back to his cell on thursday night  that policeman finerty was
detailed to watch him  as it was feared he might attempt to kill himself  the
policeman says that the prisoner was restless until after sunrise  at first he
paced the cell like a caged animal  stopping now and then and pressing his
face against the gate  his bloodshot eyes glaring through the trellis work 
this continued several hours  then  for the first time  he gave way to his
feelings  he threw himself upon the floor and moaned piteously  then he sprang
up again  leaped to the gate  and tried to shake it  after that he again paced
the cell  wringing his hands wildly and calling out german words which the
policeman could not understand  toward morning he became more quiet  but even
when lying down he tossed about and did not sleep  finerty says that kenkowsky
is one of the most powerful men he has seen  that when he tried to shake the
cell gate he could see the muscles moving beneath his sleeves 

the news that the guttenberg murderer had been captured spread rapidly in the
neighborhood  and by eight o clock in the morning some     persons were in
thirty seventh street  pressing toward the police station and standing on
either side of the station nearly all the way to ninth and tenth avenues  a
little after   o clock a woman with a young boy at her side and a little girl
in her arms was seen trying to make her way through the crowd  whenever it was
so dense as to impede her progress she spoke a few words  and those in the
immediate vicinity fell back and allowed her   to pass  the boy was crying
bitterly  but the woman s features were firmly set  and the little girl  who
seemed to be about   years old  was quiet  when the woman had made her way to
the station door she hesitated a moment  then she entered  dragging the boy 
who seemed unwilling to follow  after her  she was the prisoner s wife  people
now began to climb upon some empty trunks near by  and even women with babies
in their arms were seen on the wagons  up to this point the crowd had been
quiet  but when the coach in which kenkowsky was to be conveyed to the
jefferson market police court appeared  some one shouted   kill him   and an
angry howl went up from the dense throng 

 lynch him  hang him to a lamp post   was shouted by others  no attempt 
however  was made to carry out these threats 

meanwhile chief of police donovan of hoboken and detective stanton had
arrived  and the prisoner had been led from his cell  when he saw his wife and
children he burst into tears  his wife also wept and called out 

 why did you not take my advice  why did you not stay away from her  

 i swear to god i am innocent   he called out   let me kiss you  katrina  let
me kiss you and my children  

he stepped toward her with arms spread as though to embrace her  but she
started back in a half frightened way  the boy  however  sprang toward him and
clasped his arms around his neck  the woman turned her face away and only
allowed him to kiss her neck  while the little girl pushed him off and then
shrank away  just then the crowd without howled  kenkowsky turned ghastly pale
and trembled  while his wife fainted and fell upon the floor  and the boy wept
louder than ever  the little girl leaned over her mother and patted her cheek
with one hand  while with the other she made a repelling motion toward her
father  the prisoner was led away  and as soon as the wife came to her senses
she went away with her children  when the door closed on her she stood for a
moment gazing in a dazed manner at the crowd  the people seemed to pity her 
one man took her hand and led her down the steps  and then she passed through
the crowd unmolested by either word or act  her face was pale but calm  and
the little girl was as quiet as she had been throughout all the trying scenes 
but the boy  who clung to his mother s skirt  was still crying bitterly 

kenkowsky was again led back before the sergeant at the desk as soon as his
family had gone  he was then quite calm and collected  he turned to a
policeman and said in german   i am innocent  i suppose you will let me go
home soon  

 why   replied the policeman   whether you re guilty or not  you ll be mighty
lucky if you get off  

the prisoner was then asked if he would go quietly to court  and he said he
would  he was manacled  and between two policemen was marched out of the
station  his appearance was a signal for another howl from the    crowd  who
pressed around the party so closely that the policemen used their clubs  the
prisoner turned pale  and trembled as he had done in the station when he heard
the angry cry without  he was hustled into the coach  and as soon as the door
was closed the driver whipped up his horses  and they started off at such
speed that the crowd had to fall back  many  however  ran after the coach
several blocks down ninth avenue  and some boys followed it all the way to the
jefferson market police court 

       images i    jpg 

finding the body of mina schmidt  alias muller  alias kenkouwsky  where it had
been left by her husband

   the prisoner was taken into a small room  and when court was opened he was
led before justice morgan  capt  washburn  coroner wiggins  chief donovan 
detective stanton  and g  a  seide were in court  capt  washburn stated the
case to the justice  and said the new jersey authorities wished to have the
custody of the prisoner  the justice called up kenkowsky and asked if he knew
why he was to be taken to new jersey  the french interpreter translated the
question  but the prisoner said he understood german better than he did
french  so the german interpreter was called in  kenkowsky replied in the
affirmative  he further said that he knew his legal rights  but that he was
willing to go to new jersey without any formal proceedings  the justice then
endorsed the warrant and capt  washburn handed over the prisoner to chief
donovan  kenkowsky s manacles had been taken off  and he asked that he be
allowed to have his arms free  his request was granted 

kenkowsky was then again placed in the coach  which was driven hurriedly
through west tenth street to the hoboken ferry and upon the ferryboat
moonachie 

kenkowsky s coming had been anticipated in hoboken  and an immense throng had
gathered at the ferry on the hoboken side  rendering the streets leading to
the river almost impassable  as each boat reached the slip the policemen on
duty there experienced the utmost difficulty in restraining the crowd that
pressed forward eagerly in the desire to get a glimpse of the prisoner  when
at last he landed on the new jersey shore the carriage was driven as rapidly
as possible through the multitude in the direction of police headquarters 
some one in the throng recognized chief donovan in the vehicle and shouted to
the bystanders 

 there s the murderer  there s the murderer  

the news spread like wildfire  and was received with mingled threats and
shouts of exultation  cries of  hang him    lynch the wretch    we ll fix
him   were heard on all sides  the coach dashed up newark street to hudson
street  pursued by over       persons  shouting at the top of their voices 
chief donovan deemed it prudent to avoid the still larger crowds that swarmed
around the police station on washington street  he therefore directed the
driver to pull up his horses at the end of an alley that led to the rear of
the building  the prisoner was conducted through this passage to the station 
he was placed in a cell at the end of the corridor 

while he was lying in jail awaiting the opening of the inquest  which   had
been adjourned until   o clock  another link in the chain of circumstantial
evidence against him was being prepared  regina herkfeldt     years old  of
    newark avenue  told the police that on monday  may    she went to an
intelligence office in mott street to get a situation as a servant  there she
met a man answering kenkowsky s description  he engaged her to do housework 
and took her to     charles street  there he locked her in a room and
assaulted her  he then led her to the street and left her  afterward he
followed her into a saloon and took her pocketbook and a ring from her finger 
and left the saloon with them  she followed him to thirty fifth street and
tenth avenue  where she lost him  three or four days afterward the man went to
her brother s place of business  her brother is a galvanizer in the
pennsylvania railroad shops   and told him that he wanted to marry the girl 
after that he went to her house and told her he would marry her  and they went
to canal street  new york  to her sister s house  last sunday the man went to
her house and told her he was going to chicago  he said he wanted to give her
a gold watch and a ring  the watch was a lady s hunting case gold watch  with
flowers engraved on the outside case  the inside case did not look like gold 
the ring was chased  and had one round dark blue stone set in a crown setting 
with four claws which held the stone  he would not let her keep the ring  but
said he would send her one from chicago  he went back on wednesday  the   th 
and told her she must get a situation  and he would send for her from chicago 
the girl could not remember the man s name 

when chief donovan heard this story he telegraphed to jersey city for the
girl  and she was taken to hoboken by detective bowe  kenkowsky and a number
of other persons were admitted to the large drill room of the station  and the
girl was then led in and requested to point out the man  no sooner had she
entered the apartment than she walked opposite to kenkowsky  looked at him
steadily for an instant  and then  as she waved her umbrella toward him 
exclaimed 

 das ist der man  

 ask him   said chief donovan to aid ringe   whether he has ever seen this
woman before  

the aid interpreted the question and the prisoner grunted out a negative
answer 

at   o clock in the afternoon  the hour appointed for the continuation of the
inquest  a great throng swarmed in washington street between police
headquarters and the morgue  kenkowsky was led through this crowd by chief
donovan and an escort of policemen  the prisoner s appearance was greeted with
the same threatening cries that had been uttered on his arrival in hoboken 
but he bore up against the clamor with real or well feigned indifference  when
he entered the hall and was being led to a seat at the side of the coroner s
chair his eyes accidentally fell upon the lay figure that had been draped with
the clothing of the murdered woman  when he saw   it he averted his face with
a perceptible tremor  he almost immediately recovered his composure and
dropped into his seat 

the rev  dr  mabon  the pastor of the grove reformed dutch church  testified 
 to the best of my knowledge i think the prisoner is the man that i married
under the name of louis kettler  

sarah jane rigler  who had directed the couple to dr  mabon s house on may   
testified   i recognize the prisoner as the man who was with the woman who
asked me where she could get a minister to marry them  

john e  schumann  the barber who had been called in by dr  mabon to witness
the ceremony  said that he believed the prisoner to be the man who was married
on that occasion 

regina herkfeldt testified concerning her acquaintance with kenkowsky  she
identified a watch that was produced as the one that he gave her  on cross 
examination she considerably modified her previous account of the prisoner s
assault upon her 

john e  luthy  a watchmaker of     west thirty fifth street  testified that
the prisoner called at his place on may    with the watch and left it there 
taking a receipt for it 

charles h  peters  a roundsman of the twentieth precinct  this city  testified
to a conversation he had had with the prisoner at the station on the night of
the arrest  kenkowsky admitted to him that he knew mina muller  he at first
denied but afterward confessed that he had given a watch to luthy to have
repaired  and that it belonged to mina muller  he told the roundsman that
after the trunks had been taken to christopher street  mina proposed to him to
take a walk  and they went over to new jersey and visited the scheutzen park 
they strolled into a saloon on the guttenberg road and had some beer  after
leaving it he told her he wanted to go back to new york  and she objected  as
they were talking  two men  he asserted  came along the road  one of them said
to the woman   hello  mina  what are you doing over here   when he heard this
familiar language he turned to his companion  and said   if you are that kind
of a woman  i ll have nothing to do with you   and then he parted from her 
leaving her with the two men 

while the inquest was going on the wife of the prisoner entered the room and
managed to force her way through the throng  when she turned her eyes toward
her husband she threw up her arms and fell unconscious  she was carried down
stairs to the station  where restoratives were applied 

in the evening kenkowsky was taken to the county jail and placed in the cell
formerly occupied by covert d  bennett 

in the trunks in kenkowsky s possession was found  in addition to a lot of
female clothing  a white shirt  the sleeves from the wrists to the elbows were
spotted with blood  the bosom  too  was marked with similar stains  on each
side of the shirt at about the waist there were marks of bloody fingers  a
pair of buckskin gloves with very small spots of blood on the back was also
found  the palms were soiled  as if they had been used to handle some rough
and dusty article   

    the murdered woman s funeral 

at    o clock on the morning of may   th  martin sanger  an undertaker 
removed the body of mina muller from the hoboken morgue and placed it in a
plain coffin  which was put in a hearse and driven to the residence of the
deceased woman s brother  carl schmidt      ninth avenue  on the lid of the
coffin was a silver plate with the inscription   mina muller  died may   
      aged    years   a shield bearing the words  ruhe in frieden   was also
on the coffin  a wreath of flowers inwoven with the dead woman s name rested
upon the head of the coffin  surrounded by bouquets  a throng of germans 
mostly women  were waiting in front of the house for the arrival of the body 
when the hearse appeared at about two o clock  the sidewalks for nearly a
block were almost impassable  vehicles blocked the street in some places  and
many men and boys had climbed upon the elevated railroad columns  six
carriages containing the husband and brothers of the deceased woman  and the
officers of lodge no      knights and ladies of honor  accompanied the hearse
to the grave in the lutheran cemetery  louis schlisenger  the president of the
lodge  read its ritual  mr  muller wept during the service 

mr  schlisenger said the lodge would pay the sister of mrs  muller        
mrs  muller joined the lodge several years ago  she originally assigned the
money she was entitled to as a member to her husband  but on may   she revoked
this and assigned it to her sister  when mrs  muller saw mr  schlisenger she
told him she was going to france  and in case of her death she desired that
her sister should receive the money 

    the person who caused kenkowsky s capture arrested as an accomplice  how
kenkowsky spent sunday 

at half past one o clock on the morning of may   d  detectives heidelberg and
dolan arrested philip emden of     west thirty ninth street  on the charge
that he was an accomplice of martin kenkowsky  emden was locked up in a cell
at the police headquarters  in the morning  however  he was liberated  it was
said that he was arraigned at the jefferson market police court and liberated 
but on the other hand it was reported that he was not taken to court at all 
but that captain washburn of the twentieth precinct called at headquarters 
and that after a conversation the captain had with inspector byrnes  emden was
liberated  the police were reticent about the procedure  but the result was
that emden was freed 

capt  washburn was indignant at emden s arrest  he said   emden was the first
man to give a clue to kenkowsky  and i promised to keep his name a secret  we
are in the habit of taking informers  names in confidence  otherwise people
wouldn t give us information  prosecutor mcgill also promised me that he would
not disclose the name  i think kenkowsky s wife found out that emden had given
me information  and she   tried  out of revenge  to throw suspicions on him 
emden has lived three years in the district  and is a quiet  well behaved man 
chief donovan was perfectly willing that emden should be set at liberty  emden
will accompany me to testify at the inquest  he certainly has not behaved like
a man who has committed a murder  

philip emden was found at his house      west thirty ninth street  according
to his statement he met kenkowsky shortly after the latter came to this
country  emden is a mason  and found odd jobs for kenkowsky  who is of the
same trade  on feb     last emden married bertha himmelsbach  and kenkowsky
was one of the witnesses to the ceremony  though on the certificate his name
appears as martin karkowsky  shortly after the marriage emden was told by
kenkowsky that mina muller  a friend of his  knew bertha himmelsbach  who  she
said  was a bad woman  this led to difficulties between emden and his wife 
which ended in their separation on april     since that time he has seen very
little of kenkowsky  but he says that on one occasion the prisoner showed him
a gold watch and chain corresponding to those owned by mina muller  emden does
not know whether this was before or after the murder 

on thursday morning he read of the identification  and in h  luhr s liquor
store      tenth avenue  he mentioned that kenkowsky had known mina muller 
luhr  who knew kenkowsky  suggested that the description of the man who was
married in guttenberg tallied with kenkowsky s appearance  emden made up his
mind to see if kenkowsky was still at his house      west thirty sixth street 
as his pretence for calling  he determined to say that he had a job for the
alleged murderer  he found him in bed  and  when he asked if he wanted the
job  kenkowsky said that he was engaged as a cook in a jewish family on fifth
avenue  and only came home nights  after working hours  emden went to capt 
washburn and informed him of his suspicions  and a policeman was sent with him
to watch the house  in front of the house they found strang  the trunkman  who
in the meantime had been tracked by seide  strang asked emden if he could
speak german  and  when the latter answered in the affirmative  requested him
to ask the german woman up stairs if a trunk he was to deliver belonged to
her  saying he had left three trunks there some time previously  emden went up
stairs and asked mrs  kenkowsky if three trunks had been delivered there  and
she said they had not  when emden came back to strang with this answer  strang
requested him to ask again  and this time she replied in the affirmative  and
when strang brought up kenkowsky s trunk  she said  in surprise   why  he told
me he had taken it to where he was working in fifth avenue  

kenkowsky s wife was found at     west thirty sixth street  she had just
returned from a visit to her husband in jail  her eyes were red as though she
had been weeping 

 philip emden   she said   has been a good friend to me and my poor little
ones  when i told my husband this afternoon in jail that philip   had been
arrested  he threw up his arms and exclaimed   philip arrested  philip  who
has always been so good to us  he is innocent  katrina  as innocent as i am
myself  

martin kenkowsky spent sunday quietly in his cell in the hudson county jail at
jersey city  he ate his meals regularly and with much relish  and slept for an
hour after dinner  in the afternoon his wife and two children visited him  he
embraced them and had a long conversation with them in the presence of a
turnkey  in the course of their talk the woman charged him with having stolen
a five dollar gold piece from her room on the evening of may  d  that was the
day on which the murder was committed  kenkowsky admitted that he had taken
the money  he said that after he had left mina with the two men at union hill 
he returned to new york city and went home  there he found the    piece  which
his wife had saved  and put it in his pocket  when he was told of the arrest
of emden he seemed to be very much surprised  he said he knew emden  and had
become acquainted with him only a short time ago 

 but   he exclaimed   he is as innocent as i am  

the prisoner referred frequently to his former narrative as to the
circumstances under which he parted with mrs  muller in new jersey  he stated
that one of the two men who accosted her in the schuetzen park  and with whom
he says he left her  was tall  and had a red moustache  and the other was
shorter and thinner  he was convinced  he declared  that they murdered her 

city missionary verrinder held divine service in the corridor of the jail on
sunday morning  kenkowsky  at his own request  was permitted to attend the
exercises  he sat on the foremost bench  directly in front of the minister 
and although he did not understand the sermon  he bowed his head reverently
whenever the name of jesus was uttered by the preacher  at an early hour he
went to bed  and fell asleep a few moments later 

the reader who has followed us thus far will perceive that scarcely ever in
the records of modern murder cases has such a steel coil of circumstantial
evidence  in such a small space of time  so completely woven itself around a
murderer  kenkowsky attempted to prove an alibi by asserting that on the day
of the murder  and several hours before it could have taken place  he was on
his way to cross the river  and that on his way he had asked the direction to
the ferry of a carpenter whom he saw putting up posts for a fence  this
carpenter was found  and testified that a man on that date had asked him the
way to the ferry  but he failed to recognize kenkowsky as that man  the bottom
of the alibi leaked  however  when the gentleman on whose property the fence
was being put up showed his diary  in which was recorded a mem  of that
particular job  dated several days after the date of the murder  what verdict
could a coroner s jury bring in but one fastening the crime on kenkowsky  the
trial will be read with great interest 

the end 

    images i   a jpg 

martin kenkouwsky  alias kettler  in his cell 

    images i   b jpg 

augustus a  seide   
the jersey city reporter who solved the weehawken mystery 

     

transcriber s note

efforts have been taken to transcribe this work as originally published 
including inconsistent capitalization and punctuation  and alternative titles 
names and spelling  except on page    where  ogether  has been changed to
 together  

    
    
     
     
     
     
     
     
    end of project gutenberg s the cruel murder of mina miller  by unknown 
     
        end of this project gutenberg ebook the cruel murder of mina miller     
     
          this file should be named       h htm or       h zip       
    this and all associated files of various formats will be found in  
            http   www gutenberg org                
     
    produced by the online distributed proofreading team at 
    http   www pgdp net  images courtesy of cornell university 
    law library  trial pamphlets collection  
     
    updated editions will replace the previous one  the old editions will 
    be renamed  
     
    creating the works from print editions not protected by u s  copyright 
    law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works  
    so the foundation  and you   can copy and distribute it in the united 
    states without permission and without paying copyright 
    royalties  special rules  set forth in the general terms of use part 
    of this license  apply to copying and distributing project 
    gutenberg tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg tm 
    concept and trademark  project gutenberg is a registered trademark  
    and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks  unless you receive 
    specific permission  if you do not charge anything for copies of this 
    ebook  complying with the rules is very easy  you may use this ebook 
    for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works  reports  
    performances and research  they may be modified and printed and given 
    away  you may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks 
    not protected by u s  copyright law  redistribution is subject to the 
    trademark license  especially commercial redistribution  
     
    start  full license 
     
    the full project gutenberg license 
    please read this before you distribute or use this work 
     
    to protect the project gutenberg tm mission of promoting the free 
    distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work 
     or any other work associated in any way with the phrase  project 
    gutenberg    you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
    project gutenberg tm license available with this file or online at 
    www gutenberg org license  
     
    section    general terms of use and redistributing project 
    gutenberg tm electronic works 
     
      a  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg tm 
    electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to 
    and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
     trademark copyright  agreement  if you do not agree to abide by all 
    the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or 
    destroy all copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in your 
    possession  if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a 
    project gutenberg tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
    by the terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the 
    person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
      e    
     
      b   project gutenberg  is a registered trademark  it may only be 
    used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who 
    agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement  there are a few 
    things that you can do with most project gutenberg tm electronic works 
    even without complying with the full terms of this agreement  see 
    paragraph   c below  there are a lot of things you can do with project 
    gutenberg tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
    agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg tm 
    electronic works  see paragraph   e below  
     
      c  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation   the 
    foundation  or pglaf   owns a compilation copyright in the collection 
    of project gutenberg tm electronic works  nearly all the individual 
    works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
    states  if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
    united states and you are located in the united states  we do not 
    claim a right to prevent you from copying  distributing  performing  
    displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as 
    all references to project gutenberg are removed  of course  we hope 
    that you will support the project gutenberg tm mission of promoting 
    free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg tm 
    works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
    project gutenberg tm name associated with the work  you can easily 
    comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
    same format with its attached full project gutenberg tm license when 
    you share it without charge with others  
     
      d  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern 
    what you can do with this work  copyright laws in most countries are 
    in a constant state of change  if you are outside the united states  
    check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this 
    agreement before downloading  copying  displaying  performing  
    distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any 
    other project gutenberg tm work  the foundation makes no 
    representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
    country outside the united states  
     
      e  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg  
     
      e    the following sentence  with active links to  or other 
    immediate access to  the full project gutenberg tm license must appear 
    prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg tm work  any work 
    on which the phrase  project gutenberg  appears  or with which the 
    phrase  project gutenberg  is associated  is accessed  displayed  
    performed  viewed  copied or distributed  
     
      this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
      most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
      restrictions whatsoever  you may copy it  give it away or re use it 
      under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
      ebook or online at www gutenberg org  if you are not located in the 
      united states  you ll have to check the laws of the country where you 
      are located before using this ebook  
     
      e    if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is 
    derived from texts not protected by u s  copyright law  does not 
    contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the 
    copyright holder   the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in 
    the united states without paying any fees or charges  if you are 
    redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase  project 
    gutenberg  associated with or appearing on the work  you must comply 
    either with the requirements of paragraphs   e   through   e   or 
    obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg tm 
    trademark as set forth in paragraphs   e   or   e    
     
      e    if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is posted 
    with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution 
    must comply with both paragraphs   e   through   e   and any 
    additional terms imposed by the copyright holder  additional terms 
    will be linked to the project gutenberg tm license for all works 
    posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
    beginning of this work  
     
      e    do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg tm 
    license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this 
    work or any other work associated with project gutenberg tm  
     
      e    do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this 
    electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without 
    prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph   e   with 
    active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
    gutenberg tm license  
     
      e    you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary  
    compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including 
    any word processing or hypertext form  however  if you provide access 
    to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg tm work in a format 
    other than  plain vanilla ascii  or other format used in the official 
    version posted on the official project gutenberg tm web site 
     www gutenberg org   you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense 
    to the user  provide a copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means 
    of obtaining a copy upon request  of the work in its original  plain 
    vanilla ascii  or other form  any alternate format must include the 
    full project gutenberg tm license as specified in paragraph   e    
     
      e    do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying  
    performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg tm works 
    unless you comply with paragraph   e   or   e    
     
      e    you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing 
    access to or distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works 
    provided that 
     
      you pay a royalty fee of     of the gross profits you derive from 
      the use of project gutenberg tm works calculated using the method 
      you already use to calculate your applicable taxes  the fee is owed 
      to the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark  but he has 
      agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project 
      gutenberg literary archive foundation  royalty payments must be paid 
      within    days following each date on which you prepare  or are 
      legally required to prepare  your periodic tax returns  royalty 
      payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
      gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in 
      section     information about donations to the project gutenberg 
      literary archive foundation   
     
      you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies 
      you in writing  or by e mail  within    days of receipt that s he 
      does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg tm 
      license  you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
      copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
      all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg tm 
      works  
     
      you provide  in accordance with paragraph   f    a full refund of 
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the 
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within    days of 
      receipt of the work  
     
      you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
      distribution of project gutenberg tm works  
     
      e    if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
    gutenberg tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
    are set forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing 
    from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
    project gutenberg trademark llc  the owner of the project gutenberg tm 
    trademark  contact the foundation as set forth in section   below  
     
      f  
     
      f    project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable 
    effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread 
    works not protected by u s  copyright law in creating the project 
    gutenberg tm collection  despite these efforts  project gutenberg tm 
    electronic works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may 
    contain  defects   such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate 
    or corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other 
    intellectual property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or 
    other medium  a computer virus  or computer codes that damage or 
    cannot be read by your equipment  
     
      f    limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the  right 
    of replacement or refund  described in paragraph   f    the project 
    gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project 
    gutenberg tm trademark  and any other party distributing a project 
    gutenberg tm electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all 
    liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal 
    fees  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict 
    liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
    provided in paragraph   f    you agree that the foundation  the 
    trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
    liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or 
    incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
    damage  
     
      f    limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a 
    defect in this electronic work within    days of receiving it  you can 
    receive a refund of the money  if any  you paid for it by sending a 
    written explanation to the person you received the work from  if you 
    received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium 
    with your written explanation  the person or entity that provided you 
    with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
    lieu of a refund  if you received the work electronically  the person 
    or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
    opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund  if 
    the second copy is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing 
    without further opportunities to fix the problem  
     
      f    except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
    in paragraph   f    this work is provided to you  as is   with no 
    other warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not 
    limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose  
     
      f    some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied 
    warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of 
    damages  if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
    violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement  the 
    agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or 
    limitation permitted by the applicable state law  the invalidity or 
    unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
    remaining provisions  
     
      f    indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the 
    trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone 
    providing copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in 
    accordance with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the 
    production  promotion and distribution of project gutenberg tm 
    electronic works  harmless from all liability  costs and expenses  
    including legal fees  that arise directly or indirectly from any of 
    the following which you do or cause to occur   a  distribution of this 
    or any project gutenberg tm work   b  alteration  modification  or 
    additions or deletions to any project gutenberg tm work  and  c  any 
    defect you cause  
     
    section    information about the mission of project gutenberg tm 
     
    project gutenberg tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
    electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of 
    computers including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers  it 
    exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations 
    from people in all walks of life  
     
    volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the 
    assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg tm s 
    goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg tm collection will 
    remain freely available for generations to come  in       the project 
    gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure 
    and permanent future for project gutenberg tm and future 
    generations  to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
    archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help  see 
    sections   and   and the foundation information page at 
    www gutenberg org 
     
     
     
    section    information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
     
    the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
        c     educational corporation organized under the laws of the 
    state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal 
    revenue service  the foundation s ein or federal tax identification 
    number is             contributions to the project gutenberg literary 
    archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by 
    u s  federal laws and your state s laws  
     
    the foundation s principal office is in fairbanks  alaska  with the 
    mailing address  po box         fairbanks  ak        but its 
    volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous 
    locations  its business office is located at     north      west  salt 
    lake city  ut                        email contact links and up to 
    date contact information can be found at the foundation s web site and 
    official page at www gutenberg org contact 
     
    for additional contact information  
     
        dr  gregory b  newby 
        chief executive and director 
        gbnewby pglaf org 
     
    section    information about donations to the project gutenberg 
    literary archive foundation 
     
    project gutenberg tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide 
    spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of 
    increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
    freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
    array of equipment including outdated equipment  many small donations 
        to         are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt 
    status with the irs  
     
    the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating 
    charities and charitable donations in all    states of the united 
    states  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a 
    considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up 
    with these requirements  we do not solicit donations in locations 
    where we have not received written confirmation of compliance  to send 
    donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
    state visit www gutenberg org donate 
     
    while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we 
    have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition 
    against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who 
    approach us with offers to donate  
     
    international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make 
    any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from 
    outside the united states  u s  laws alone swamp our small staff  
     
    please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation 
    methods and addresses  donations are accepted in a number of other 
    ways including checks  online payments and credit card donations  to 
    donate  please visit  www gutenberg org donate 
     
    section    general information about project gutenberg tm electronic works  
     
    professor michael s  hart was the originator of the project 
    gutenberg tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
    freely shared with anyone  for forty years  he produced and 
    distributed project gutenberg tm ebooks with only a loose network of 
    volunteer support  
     
    project gutenberg tm ebooks are often created from several printed 
    editions  all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in 
    the u s  unless a copyright notice is included  thus  we do not 
    necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper 
    edition  
     
    most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
    facility  www gutenberg org 
     
    this web site includes information about project gutenberg tm  
    including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary 
    archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to 
    subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks  
     
     
     
    

