
* * *

# THE CRUEL MURDER  
OF  
MINA MILLER  
BY  
KENKOUWSKY, alias “KETTLER”

* * *

* * *

Wedded and Murdered Within an Hour!

THE CRUEL MURDER  
OF  
MINA MILLER  
BY  
KENKOUWSKY, alias “KETTLER.”

* * *

The Guttenberg-Hoboken Tragedy.

* * *

A THRILLING AND REMARKABLE CASE, WHICH  
RECALLS THE MURDER OF MARY RODGERS,  
“THE SEGAR GIRL,” WHICH TOOK PLACE ON  
THE SAME SPOT, THE SCENE OF OTHER  
MURDERS OF A LIKE CHARACTER.

* * *

THE ONLY LIFE OF MINA MILLER PUBLISHED

* * *

BARCLAY & CO., Publishers,  
21 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

* * *

AGENTS WANTED AT ALL TIMES.

* * *

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1881, by  
BARCLAY & CO.,  
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington, D. C.

THE MINA MULLER MURDER.

* * *

## MURDERED BY HER HUSBAND OF AN HOUR.

* * *

On Friday morning, the 13th of last May, a German, whose purpose was to gather
green leaves to sell to florists in N. Y. city, entered the path leading from
Bergen avenue, in the district known as Bull’s Ferry, north of Weehawken. He
had followed it eastward toward the river about 100 feet, and had turned aside
to the right about twenty feet, when he was appalled by almost stepping upon
the dead body of a woman. He hurried away to inform the police.

Early in the afternoon Coroner Wiggins, of Hoboken, visited the spot and made
a careful examination. He judged that the woman had not been over 25 years
old. Along the top of the head, on the left side, was a deep gash, and beneath
it the skull was fractured. There was another gash over the right eye. Both of
these gashes were apparently made with the edge of a stone. The nose was
broken in the middle. The right side of the head had apparently been crushed
by a stone. The left ear was injured as if an ear-ring had been torn from it.
Search was made for the missing ear-ring, but it was not found. Her face had
become blackened by the sun, which shone upon the spot where the body lay. The
features were small and symmetrical. She wore number one or number two
buttoned shoes.

An investigation was at once begun by the coroner, but without much success.

On the 18th the young woman was completely identified as Mrs. Philomena
Muller, the wife of Simon Muller, a tobacconist, at 502 West20 Thirtieth
street, N. Y. Mr. Muller called at the Morgue at 3 o’clock on the afternoon of
May 18th, in company with a lady whom he introduced as Miss Maria Schmidt, his
wife’s sister. He said they desired to look at the body. They were led into
the damp vault, and at sight of the body Miss Schmidt was overcome, and she
retired to the adjoining basement. Mr. Muller gazed upon the body calmly. The
jewelry and clothing of the dead woman were shown to him, and he positively
identified them as the property of his wife. He said that he had given her the
cameo brooch. Mr. Muller said that some time ago his wife deserted him, and
since then she had not lived with him. Miss Schmidt had seen her sister about
two weeks before. Mrs. Muller then informed her that she had found a decent
man, who was going to marry her and take her to Germany in the steamer
L’Amerique, which was to sail on the 4th of May. When Miss Schmidt told Mr.
Muller of this he went to the wharf of the Transatlantic Steamship Company on
the morning of May 4th, and remained at the gang plank of the vessel until all
the passengers had gone aboard. He was certain that his wife was not among
them, but he did not know her paramour.

Before this identification was made, the authorities of Hudson county had
obtained conclusive evidence of the fact that the murdered woman was Mrs.
Philomena Muller, and that her assassin had married her on the morning of the
day on which he killed her, and had taken passage on the following day for
Europe. As Mrs. Finck, the wife of an alehouse keeper in Pierce Avenue, West
New York, was sitting in her saloon on the afternoon of Tuesday, the 3d of
May, a man and a woman entered and sat down at a table. The woman ordered
drinks, and called for a glass of beer. Her companion drank soda water. While
they were there the woman talked almost incessantly. She said that they came
from Morrisania. She seemed to have plenty of money. When she paid for the
refreshments, Mrs. Finck noticed a large roll of bank notes in her pocketbook,
besides some silver and gold. Before going away, the woman borrowed a
corkscrew to open a bottle of Rhine wine which she had with her. She said she
had bought the bottle in Union Hill. Mrs. Finck minutely described the woman,
and the description tallied exactly with that of the woman who was murdered.
Prosecutor McGill was so impressed with the accuracy of Mrs. Finck’s
description, that he specially detailed Detectives Swinton and Fanning to
trace the movements of the unknown couple. They began their search on Tuesday
evening, May 17th, and Wednesday the 18th they submitted to the Prosecutor a
circumstantial account of their discoveries.

21 They began by looking for the person from whom the bottle of Rhine wine had
been purchased. Every saloon along the Boulevard and the Hackensack plank road
was visited, but to no purpose. Continuing their inquiries, they entered an
inn kept by Edward Stabel, on the Weaverstown road. When they questioned him
he said he remembered that on the day indicated by them a woman had called at
his place and asked for a bottle of Rhine wine. As he did not have any he sent
his granddaughter, Lizzie Haas, to Mr. Eberling’s store, in Bergenline avenue,
for a bottle of it. While the girl was absent the woman chatted pleasantly
with Stabel. She told him, among other things, that she had just been married
by the Rev. Mr. Mabon, the pastor of the Grove Reformed Dutch Church, and that
she wanted the wine to celebrate the event, and to treat the minister. She
also said that she was about to sail for France. When the girl came back with
the bottle of wine the woman paid her fifty cents for it, and gave her ten
cents additional out of a $5 gold piece that Stabel changed for her. On
leaving the saloon the woman was joined by a man. Stabel could not recollect
anything in particular about the man, except that he had stood outside on the
street while the woman bought the wine. But he gave a very accurate
description of the woman and her dress, which tallied both with Mrs. Finck’s
description of the woman she had seen, and with that of the murdered woman.
Mrs. Stabel furnished additional details. She said the woman came to the
saloon on the 3d of May. She was sure of the date, because on the same day
there was a burial in the Grove Church Cemetery which is only a short distance
from the inn. The woman told Mrs. Stabel of her marriage, and explained that
it had been secretly performed, because her brother disliked her husband, and
had objected to the match. She also said that she had been married once
before, and had attended a cigar store which her former husband kept in N. Y.
city. Mrs. Stabel’s circumstantial description of the woman tallied yet more
accurately than her husband’s with that of the murdered woman.

The detectives then went to the parsonage of the Grove Reformed Dutch Church,
where they found the Rev. Dr. Mabon. He recollected having married a couple on
May 3d. The woman, he said, entered his residence alone, leaving the man in
the yard, where he paced up and down as if absorbed in meditation. The woman
asked Mr. Mabon if he would perform a marriage, and upon being told yes, she
went out and returned immediately with the man. As the couple had not provided
a witness, the clergyman called in John Schuman, a barber in Union street,
Union Hill.22 The man and woman made satisfactory replies to the usual
questions, and they were married in legal form. After the ceremony they
subscribed the following record of the marriage, which is now in Mr. Mabon’s
possession:

> On Tuesday, May 3, 1881, Louis Kettler, single, aged 33, bricklayer by
occupation, and residence 1511 Second avenue, New York, married to Mina
Schmidt, single, aged 34, residence, 1247 Third avenue, New York. Father of
bridegroom, Louis Kettler; father of bride, Anastasius Schmidt. Both of the
contracting parties were born in Katenheim, Germany.

The woman did most of the talking, and seemed to be in excellent spirits. She
exhibited a bulky pocketbook, and asked Mr. Mabon how much his charge was. He
replied that she might pay him whatever she thought proper. As she had no
small bills she went out to get change, and came back presently with the money
and a bottle of Rhine wine, which she offered to the clergyman. When he
refused it she tried to persuade him to take a drink, but he declined, and,
after a few more words, the strange couple quitted the parsonage. Mr. Mabon
could not recollect anything about the dress of either of the parties, but his
colored servant girl told the detectives that she had particularly noticed the
man as he was striding up and down the garden, and acting as if his mind was
troubled. She said he was stout, with a full face and dark moustache, and wore
a high, flat-topped Derby hat.

Mrs. Sarah Rigler, who lives in the neighborhood of the church, saw the couple
before their marriage. They came along the road, and the woman stopped and
asked Mrs. Rigler:

“Can you please direct me to a priest?”

“Do you want a priest or a minister?” Mrs. Rigler inquired.

“I want a Protestant priest,” the woman responded. “I am going to be married,
and I want him to marry us.”

Mrs. Rigler’s description of the woman was almost precisely the same as Mrs.
Stabel’s. The man, she said, was quiet, and did not say anything in her
hearing. When the couple were last seen by the people in the neighborhood of
the church they were walking together toward West New York by a road that led
in the direction of Finck’s saloon and the Guttenberg ferry.

23 ![](images/i010a.jpg)

Martin Kenkouwsky

24 ![](images/i010b.jpg)

Mina Muller.

The detectives next went to 1247 Third avenue, N. Y. city, the number that had
been given to Mr. Mabon by the bride as her residence. There they were unable
for a long time to find any trace of Mina Schmidt. Finally the daughter of the
janitor remembered that a woman answering25 Miss Schmidt’s description had
been living at service with a family in the house. But the family had moved,
and the servant had gone with them. An expressman named Body had taken away
her trunks. After a tedious search Body was found. The young woman whose
trunks he had removed proved not to have been the murdered woman. But Body
said that about the 1st of May a woman whom he knew as Mrs. Mina Muller
offered to sell him some articles of furniture, as she was about to move. They
were unable to agree on the price. Mrs. Muller returned shortly afterward and
left an order to have an express wagon call for her baggage at 1511 Second
avenue, where she was then staying. Body sent William Norke, one of his
drivers, to the place, and the man received from Mrs. Muller four trunks, a
bundle of bedding, and a valise, which, by her directions, he carried to
Theodore Scherrer’s Hotel, at 178 Christopher street. Body and Norke described
Mrs. Muller, and the detectives were satisfied that she was the woman who,
under the name of Mina Schmidt, was married by Mr. Mabon in the Grove Church.
A man whom the driver did not know, but who, from his appearance, he believed
to have been the murderer, superintended the transfer of her packages, and
rode in the wagon with Norke to the hotel. On the way there he told Norke that
he intended soon to sail for Europe.

At 1511 Second avenue, whither the detectives next proceeded, they found a
German woman named Mrs. Schwan, who keeps a dyeing establishment. She did not
know any man named Kettler, but she said that a man who answered in every
respect the description of Kettler had lived in the house, but had moved about
the first of May. He had lived, she said, with a young widow, to whom she had
heard he was married. Mrs Schwan described the woman, and again the
description tallied with that of the murdered woman. Mrs. Schwan had been told
that the woman had another husband living in Thirty-ninth street. Charles
Rost, the landlord, said that on March 3d Mrs. Muller had engaged three rooms,
front, on the top floor, and had furnished them comfortably. She told Rost
that she was working for Hahn, the butcher, in Third Avenue. Her husband, Mr.
Muller, she said, had died of consumption, and had left her $1,000 insurance
on his life. She was away all day as a rule, and returned to her apartments in
the evening.

“One day,” said Mr. Rost, “about five weeks after she came here, I had
occasion to go to the roof. Her room door was wide open, and Mrs. Muller was
at work within fixing up her curtains and arranging her room. I said to her in
fun:

26 “You ought to have a husband here, Mrs. Muller.”

“‘Oh! I’ve got one,’ she said. ‘My name is Mrs. Kettler now. I’m not Mrs.
Muller any longer.’” She said, too, that her new husband was a mason,
kalsominer and paper hanger, and was getting good wages. A few days after that
Mr. Rost met him in the hallway of the house for the first time, and asked if
he lived there. He also told Kettler that he believed Mrs. Muller had another
husband living. His suspicions had been excited by the woman’s talk of her
dead husband and her inconsistent lack of mourning attire or demeanor. On May
2nd, they sold their furniture, and moved their trunks and bedding, no one
then knew whither. “The man,” said Mrs. Rost, “was a greenhorn,” and this was
the testimony of others in the building who had noticed him.

Among the persons by whom the woman had been employed was Moise Hahn, a
butcher in Third avenue. He said that she worked for him until May 1st, when
she quitted, as she intended to go to Europe. She was then living with a
foreigner whose name Hahn did not know, but whose description corresponded
with that of the groom in the marriage ceremony in Mr. Mabon’s house. She told
Hahn that she was going with him to Mulhausen in Alsace.

Mr. Scherrer of Scherrer’s Hotel at 178 Christopher street, to which place
Norke had carried the trunks and bundles belonging to the woman who gave her
name as Mina Miller, informed the detectives that on Monday evening, May 2, a
German went there with an express wagon containing four trunks, a bundle of
bedding, and a valise.

“The man,” Scherrer said, “afterwards introduced a woman who he said was his
wife. She was very talkative and had all the money and paid all the bills. The
man told me that they were going to sail in the steamship L’Amerique on the
4th inst., and were going to Mulhausen, in Alsace. On the day they came to my
place the man, who said his name was Kettler, left the trunks here, but spent
the night at Mr. Boker’s place, two doors further down the street. On Monday,
May 3, Mr. and Mrs. Kettler and I had a long chat about the old country, and
about noon they left my place and went to the direction of the Christopher
Street Ferry. Mrs. Kettler promised my wife that she would come back to bid us
good-by. Late on Tuesday night Mr. Kettler returned alone. I asked him where
his wife was, and he said she had gone to spend the night at her sister’s
house, and was to meet him on board the steamship in the morning. He seemed to
me to be very much excited and uneasy, and his behaviour struck me at27 the
time as peculiar. The next morning he had his trunks sent to the steamship
wharf, and went away. That is the last I saw of him.”

Louis Groth keeps a lager beer saloon in Thirty-ninth street, near Ninth
avenue. A friend of his living at 1511 Second avenue, in the same house with
Mrs. Muller, told Groth of her being there with Kettler. Groth told Mr.
Schmidt, Mrs. Muller’s brother, who lives at 555 Ninth avenue, and he informed
Mr. Muller of his wife’s whereabouts.

Mr. Schmidt was at his home at 555 Ninth avenue last evening. He told our
reporter who called that he saw his sister for the last time on the Sunday
before the murder. Previous to that, upon the information from Louis Groth
that she was living with Kettler in Second avenue, he saw her there, and
remonstrated with her. He also had a talk with Kettler, who, however, said
nothing of any proposed marriage. He said, however, that he knew Muller.
Muller told Schmidt that he didn’t know Kettler. Schmidt says that when his
sister Mina called at his house on Sunday she got a bank book containing $40
which he had been keeping for her, and told him that she had sold her
furniture, and had altogether $116. She was going to marry Kettler on Tuesday,
May 3, and go with Kettler to Alsace, which was his former home. Her brother
says he told her he did not want her to marry again while she had a husband,
but she said she was determined to do so.

Mr. Schmidt has a brother August, a musician, living at 49 Avenue A. and two
sisters now living one of whom is married. Muller, he says, was attentive to
the unmarried sister, and Mrs. Muller and he continually quarrelled about this
intimacy. Their disputes were so violent as to attract the attention of the
people in the house where they lived in Thirty-ninth street, and once Mr.
Muller was badly whipped, it is reported, by some friends of Mrs. Muller.

Muller and his wife were married in 1874, and lived for three and a half years
in the house at 338 West Thirty-ninth street. Muller made cigars and kept a
small store there. When he and his wife could stand each other no longer, said
Mr. Schmidt, they separated, and Mrs. Muller for a while lived in a house in
the same block. About three months previous to the murder she left the
neighborhood and secured employment in the butcher shop of Moise Heahn in
Third avenue. Muller sold his store out on April 1, and removed to his present
place in Thirtieth street. Mr. Schmidt said that Kettler, after marrying his
sister, undoubtedly led her to the lonely place of the murder for the sole
purpose of28 killing and robbing her of the $116 which she had, and the gold
watch and chain.

As Mrs. Muller left her brother’s house on Sunday she said to the saloon-
keeper on the ground floor, “I’ve got another man—a nice man now—and I’m all
right again.”

Kettler had been only seven months in this country.

Attorney-General Stockton directed Mr. McGill to telegraph to the authorities
at Havre, describing Kettler, and requesting his arrest on a charge of murder.
Detective Edward Stanton was to sail for Europe on Saturday in pursuit of the
murderer, but subsequent events proved this unnecessary, as the reader will
learn by following this complete and dramatic recital.

* * *

## TRACKED AND ARRESTED.

> Wildly Declaring his Innocence, yet admitting that he was in Hoboken with
the murdered woman—“She Led Me Astray”—A very Touching Scene with his Wife.

![M](images/drop-m.png)

Martin Kenkouwsky, alias Louis Kettler, the murderer of Mrs. Mina Muller, was
captured on the night of May 19th, 1881, by Policemen Morris Fitzgerald and
Richard Tregonning of the Thirty-seventh street police station, as he was
walking in Thirty-sixth street, near Tenth Avenue, New York City. The clue
which led to his detection was discovered and followed out almost to the end
by Gustavus A. Seide, a reporter for a Jersey City newspaper, and compares, as
a piece of amateur detective work, with the detection of Chastine Cox, the
murderer of Mrs. Hull. Seide recognized that there was a flaw in the theory
that the alleged murderer had gone to Europe in the Amerique. There was no
certainty that the baggage which was taken from Sherrer’s house on the day the
steamer sailed was delivered at the pier of the French line, nor was there
positive evidence that Kettler himself had been seen on the pier that morning.
Superintendent West of the French pier said that on the day the Amerique
sailed, a man answering somewhat Kettler’s description had applied to him for
a ticket, and he had referred him to the purser.29 Baggage corresponding to
what Kettler was supposed to have taken with him the Superintendent had not
seen on the pier.

Seide came over to New York early Thursday morning, May 19th, and proceeded at
once to look for the man who was supposed to have taken Kettler’s baggage from
Scherrer’s Hotel to the pier. Scherrer had seen the man in the neighborhood
quite frequently, but did not know his name or where he kept. He, however,
described him to Seide as a tall, well-built man, with dark moustache and dark
complexion. The reporter started out, and visited the truck stands between
Christopher and Twentieth streets, but could not find his man. Returning to
Scherrer’s, he found a man, whom he describes as a “dilapidated individual,”
taking a drink at the bar. Seide again asked Scherrer for a description of the
truckman. Scherrer gave it as before, adding that he drove a red truck with
one brown horse. Here the “dilapidated individual” spoke up and said, the
truckman might be found at Christopher and Bleecker streets. On inquiring
there Seide learned that he changed his stand a few days before; but where he
had gone no one in the immediate vicinity could tell. He, however, discovered
that his name was C. A. Strang. He then made inquiries for Strang’s
whereabouts in various smithies and liquor stores, and in one of the latter he
ascertained that Strang lived in Greenwich street, on the west side, a few
doors below Christopher street.

At this point Seide telegraphed over to Detective Stanton of the New Jersey
force, and awaited his arrival. Then they went to Strang’s house, where Mrs.
Strang informed them that her husband was at the new market, corner of West
and Gansvoort streets. There they found him. They asked him if, on the morning
of the sailing of the Amerique, he had taken baggage belonging to Kettler to
the steamship wharf. He replied that he had not; he had taken the baggage to a
Mrs. Clifford’s, at 179 Charles street, and about ten days afterward he had
removed the valise and three ordinary yellow trunks to 510 West Thirty-sixth
street. The other trunk, which was long and black, he had not seen again. He
was not sure whether he had taken the first load on the 3d or 4th instant. He
at first refused to go with them to the house in Charles street, saying he was
too busy; but when Seide and Stanton offered to pay him for his time, he
consented.

Mrs. Clifford said that a man answering Kettler’s description had come to the
house either on the 3d or 4th inst., and she remembered that Strang had
brought a valise and four trunks. Kettler had remained at30 the house about
ten days, paying her regularly. Once he paid her with a five-dollar gold
piece. She did not notice anything peculiar or restless in his behaviour. He
kept to the house pretty closely, though he was generally out nights. She saw,
however, that he read the newspapers very closely. He told her that he was
going to California. When asked if on his departure he had taken all his
baggage, she said, no, he had left a long black trunk, which they would find
in the wood-shed. They opened the trunk, and found it full of crockery and
cooking utensils. They carried it to Strang’s truck, and directed Strang to
carry it to the house in Thirty-sixth street, to ask for Kettler, and if
Kettler was there, to give them a sign, as they would remain outside. Strang
inquired for Kettler, but was told that no man of that name lived there; but
that a man corresponding to the description lived one flight up with a wife
and two children. Strang took the trunk up stairs, and found a woman, a young
boy, and a little girl in the room designated. The woman said the trunk
belonged to Martin Kenkouwsky, her husband, and offered to pay fifty cents for
its delivery. Strang then signalled to Seide and Stanton that the man was not
in, and the reporter and detective went to an adjoining house, and received
permission to watch from the windows. Seide went out again to speak to Strang,
and while he was talking to him in front of 510 West Thirty-sixth street, both
were arrested by Policeman Tregonning. The police of Capt. Washburn’s precinct
had been looking for the same man, and had traced him to this same house. This
was the cause of the arrest of Seide and Strang. When they got to the station,
Seide explained to the Captain who he was, and the Captain sent him back with
a policeman to get Stanton to identify him. At first they couldn’t find
Stanton, and the policeman wanted to take Seide back. In the meantime the
Captain had sent Policeman Fitzgerald to aid Tregonning in arresting
Kenkouwsky. The policemen, Seide, and Stanton, who had meanwhile relieved
Seide of his embarrassment, waited for about three hours, when they saw a man
answering the description of the murderer walking up the street. Policeman
Fitzgerald arrested him. He offered no resistance, and his only exclamation
was in German: “Was ist? was ist? was ist?” He was at once taken to the
station, where he was locked up. Sergeant Brown was sent down for Scherrer,
and a policeman was despatched for Strang. Scherrer arrived about twenty
minutes after the arrest, and identified the prisoner as the man who had been
at his house under the name of Kettler. Strang also soon appeared, and he too
identified Kettler. Meanwhile Policemen had31 entered the room at 510 West
Thirty-sixth street, notified the woman of her husband’s arrest, and taken the
four trunks and the valise to the station. Our reporter was present when the
trunks were opened. Almost the first thing found when one of the yellow trunks
was opened was a letter addressed to Mrs. Mina Muller, 338 West Thirty-ninth
street. In a corner of the envelope was printed “Germania Lodge, No. 70, K. of
H.” It contained a request for her to attend a lodge meeting on Jan. 10. The
trunks were full of articles of female attire, and in one of them was a pair
of men’s gloves of white leather, stained with dirt and badly torn, as though
whoever wore them had been handling some rough object. It is thought that
Kenkowski wore these gloves when he was married and when he crushed Mina
Muller’s skull with stones. A gray wrapper, and a straw bonnet and table
covers were among the other objects found.

32 ![](images/i018a.jpg)

MARRIAGE CEREMONY WHICH TOOK PLACE AN HOUR BEFORE THE MURDER.

33 ![](images/i018b.jpg)

MURDERING MINA MULLER IN THE WOODS NORTH OF WEEHAWKEN.

At about half-past 9 the prisoner’s wife arrived at the station with her boy,
who was crying bitterly. She asked why her husband had been arrested, and why
the trunks had been taken away. When asked what his name was, she replied,
“Martin Kenkouwski,” and added that they had been married ten years ago in
Alsace, and had only been in this country a little more than half a year. Her
husband was a mason and kalsominer. When asked if he had been at home
regularly lately, she said he had been away about ten days in the beginning of
the month.

“Do you know,” asked the interpreter (the woman and her husband spoke in
German), “that he married another woman, and killed her?”

“I don’t believe it,” she replied firmly, while the boy cried more loudly than
before. “I don’t believe it!” she reiterated. “Let me see him! Don’t cry my
child” (turning to the boy), “or you will make me weep. Don’t cry!” Here her
voice faltered, and she burst into tears.

She was then led to the cell. Here a heart-rending scene occurred. She threw
herself with her child against the grating, sobbing and calling for her
husband. He was far back in the cell, and when he heard her and the child, he
shrieked from out of the darkness:

“Katrina! Katrina! Merciful Heavens! My child! My child! Great God, are you
here!”

Then he rushed forward to the cell door, pressed his face against the iron
trellis work, lifted his hands and called out: “Before God I stand a guiltless
man, and if I die I die guiltless. I was misled by the wicked woman; she led
me astray. My God, Katrina! Katrina! Give me your hand!”

34 Here he thrust his hand through the cell gate, and his wife clasped it. She
was too much overcome to speak for a while, and the child moaned and sobbed.
Kenkouwski continued reiterating his innocence, when he called out again. “The
wicked woman misled me; she led me astray.”

His wife exclaimed: “Have I not been a good wife? Have I not prayed to God for
you?” Then she sobbed again. After a while she said to him: “I don’t believe
you killed her! I don’t believe it!” After this she and the child were led
away, and he called after them: “By God, Katrina, I am innocent. I am
innocent.”

The woman said he had always been a good husband to her, nor did she seem to
know anything of Mina Muller. She said nothing when asked what she had thought
when her husband came back with three yellow trunks after an absence of ten
days.

Shortly after the woman left, Kenkouwski was led before the Sergeant for
examination. He looked wild and nervous, and gesticulated violently. “He must
be watched well to-night,” said one of the policemen, “or he’ll hang himself.”
As he approached the desk, he suddenly threw up his arms and exclaimed:

“Now, I will tell you the truth. If it is not the truth you may take a knife
and cut my throat, like this,” (here he pulled his finger across his neck.)
“Mina Schmidt told me the other day that she knew I was married, but she
wanted me to marry her and go to Germany with her, where she had very good
parents living. At that time I didn’t know she was married. We went to
Guttenberg to get married, and when we got over there we went to the Schutzen
Park. Two men there came up to me and told me that she did not love me, that
she loved another. When she heard this she sprang up and ran away from me, and
I have not seen her since.”

He was then led back to his cell. He was again brought from his cell at about
11 o’clock to be looked at by the reporters assembled in the Thirty-seventh
street station. He had been lying down, and the light dust from the cell floor
covered his back. He looked in a bewildered manner at the throng about him,
spoke a few words in German, reasserting what he had previously said in regard
to the murder, and was taken back again. His eyes were bloodshot, and he spoke
in a nervous manner.

“Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!” exclaimed Kenkouwsky, “does any one speak French?

“I do!” replied another reporter, addressing him in French.

35 Kenkouwsky sprang from his seat and, with tears falling fast, seized the
reporter by the hand and said: “Tell them that as our Saviour, who was
crucified, was innocent, so am I!”

“Of what?” asked the reporter.

“Of the murder of Mina Schmidt. I married her that day, although I have a wife
here. She told me she loved me. I did not tell her I was married. After we
were married we went to Schuetzen Park. There we sat at a table drinking, when
two men came by. They greeted Mina as old friends, and we all drank together.
One of the men took her away, and the other then told me that Mina had said
that she did not love me. They all left me, and I, after hunting for them,
came back to this city and tried to find her.”

Chief of Police Donovan of Hoboken, who had been standing by all this time and
listening to what the reporter quickly translated, touched the reporter on the
shoulder and said: “Ask him if he was not in Jersey City last night.”

The reporter asked the question. Kenkouwsky staggered back and repeated,
“Jersey City! Jersey City! Where is that?” The reporter repeated the question.

Kenkouwsky replied: “I was with my wife last night.”

“In Jersey City?” asked the reporter.

“No; I was with a woman there.”

Chief Donovan’s eyes brightened, and he then said: “Last Monday a young girl,
whose name I cannot now mention, was taken into a house by this man. He made
her drink wine, and as she was partly stupefied, he locked the doors and
assaulted her. It was for this offence that I and my detectives were hunting
him up to-day. We did not then suspect that he was the murderer of Mrs.
Schmidt. Last night he was to meet another girl, but she became frightened and
did not stay where he told her to until he came. He eluded us by ten minutes.”

In the prisoner’s pocket was found a clipping from a German paper of the
account of the hanging of Mrs. Meierhoffer and her paramour last winter. To
the reporter he said he had not read any account of the Guttenberg murder
until the day previous to his arrest.

At midnight Chief Donovan had the trunks of Mrs. Mina Schmidt taken over to
Hoboken.

Detective Stanton told our reporter that an empty watch case had been found in
the room at 510 West Thirty-sixth street. On the yellow trunks labels were
pasted with the address:

36

Monsieur Joseph Reymann,

No. 52 Rue Clissant,

Paris (France).

The purpose of this address was, it is supposed, to induce Scherrer to believe
that he was to take the French steamer.

Seide says he has ascertained that on Monday night, May 2, Kenkouwsky applied
at Becker’s Hotel in Christopher street, for a room, but refused to write his
name. The entry is in the hotel clerk’s hand. “Louis Kettler, Room No. 1.”

Coroner Wiggins began an inquest in the case in Hoboken on the afternoon of
May 19th. Simon Muller, the husband of the murdered woman, testified: “Coroner
Wiggins told me on Wednesday that my wife had been found murdered in
Guttenberg. I told him that it could not be so, for that she had gone to
Germany with a man from Alsace. I went to the French steamship wharf on the
day I heard they were to sail, and watched for her until the ship sailed, but
she did not come. I was married to her five years ago. Our married life was
unhappy, and on the 5th of last January she left me. She had then between $75
and $100.”

Carl Schmidt, the brother of the murdered woman, testified: “I last saw my
sister Philomina at my place, 555 Ninth avenue, New York. She came to my house
on Sunday, May 1, at about 5 o’clock in the afternoon. She told me she was
going with a man named Louis Kettler to Mulhausen, in Alsace. I asked her why
she was going. She replied that Kettler was well off at home. ‘You know,’ she
said, ‘what treatment I have had from my husband.’ I told her that I knew he
did not treat her right, but that she should not go with this man, as she did
not know him at all. And further, I told her that she must first get a
separation from Muller before she could go with another man. She answered, ‘I
don’t care how it will result, I will go with him. My husband tried to shoot
me.’ She also told me that she had known Kettler for four weeks, and he had
told her that he had property in Mulhausen, and that he would give her a good
home there. Kettler, she said, was richer than the whole Schmidt family. She
left me at about 6½ o’clock to go to my other sister’s house in Tenth avenue,
between Nineteenth and Twentieth streets. I never saw Kettler but once, and
that was on a Sunday in April in Second avenue, near Seventy-ninth street, in
my sister’s apartments. On May 2nd a cousin of my wife met Kettler on the
street and asked him when he and Mina were going to Europe. He replied that he
was not going to Europe. The cousin then asked what Mina would do, and he said
she would go to the country, where she had friends to stay with. Kettler then
suggested that the cousin37 and he should go off together, and leave Mina
behind. Since the 3rd of May, on the 9th or 10th of the month, I think, the
woman Sacks saw Louis Kettler passing up on the opposite side of the street.
When she noticed him she called my wife, who was in the room with her, to the
window.”

The Rev. Dr. Mabon, the pastor of the Grove Reformed Dutch Church, on the
Weavertown road, at whose house the murdered woman and Kettler were married,
testified that he had performed the ceremony.

“When I asked the man,” he said, “if he took the woman for his lawful wife, he
answered ‘Yes,’ and at the time I noticed a tear in his eye.”

The inquest was suddenly adjourned on the news of the murderer’s arrest in N.
Y. city.

* * *

## THREATENING TO LYNCH HIM.

> The Scene at his Parting from his Wife and Children—Angry Throngs in
Hoboken—Giving Away the Murdered Woman’s Watch—The Testimony.

![O](images/drop-o.png)

Over in New York Martin Kenkowsky was closely watched. He was so agitated when
he was led back to his cell on Thursday night, that Policeman Finerty was
detailed to watch him, as it was feared he might attempt to kill himself. The
policeman says that the prisoner was restless until after sunrise. At first he
paced the cell like a caged animal, stopping now and then and pressing his
face against the gate, his bloodshot eyes glaring through the trellis work.
This continued several hours. Then, for the first time, he gave way to his
feelings. He threw himself upon the floor and moaned piteously. Then he sprang
up again, leaped to the gate, and tried to shake it. After that he again paced
the cell, wringing his hands wildly and calling out German words which the
policeman could not understand. Toward morning he became more quiet, but even
when lying down he tossed about and did not sleep. Finerty says that Kenkowsky
is one of the most powerful men he has seen; that when he tried to shake the
cell gate he could see the muscles moving beneath his sleeves.

The news that the Guttenberg murderer had been captured spread rapidly in the
neighborhood, and by eight o’clock in the morning some 400 persons were in
Thirty-seventh street, pressing toward the police station and standing on
either side of the station nearly all the way to Ninth and Tenth avenues. A
little after 8 o’clock a woman with a young boy at her side and a little girl
in her arms was seen trying to make her way through the crowd. Whenever it was
so dense as to impede her progress she spoke a few words, and those in the
immediate vicinity fell back and allowed her38 to pass. The boy was crying
bitterly, but the woman’s features were firmly set, and the little girl, who
seemed to be about 6 years old, was quiet. When the woman had made her way to
the station door she hesitated a moment. Then she entered, dragging the boy,
who seemed unwilling to follow, after her. She was the prisoner’s wife. People
now began to climb upon some empty trunks near by, and even women with babies
in their arms were seen on the wagons. Up to this point the crowd had been
quiet. But when the coach in which Kenkowsky was to be conveyed to the
Jefferson Market Police Court appeared, some one shouted, “Kill him!” and an
angry howl went up from the dense throng.

“Lynch him! Hang him to a lamp post!” was shouted by others. No attempt,
however, was made to carry out these threats.

Meanwhile Chief of Police Donovan of Hoboken and Detective Stanton had
arrived, and the prisoner had been led from his cell. When he saw his wife and
children he burst into tears. His wife also wept and called out:

“Why did you not take my advice? Why did you not stay away from her?”

“I swear to God I am innocent,” he called out. “Let me kiss you, Katrina; let
me kiss you and my children!”

He stepped toward her with arms spread as though to embrace her, but she
started back in a half frightened way. The boy, however, sprang toward him and
clasped his arms around his neck. The woman turned her face away and only
allowed him to kiss her neck, while the little girl pushed him off and then
shrank away. Just then the crowd without howled. Kenkowsky turned ghastly pale
and trembled, while his wife fainted and fell upon the floor, and the boy wept
louder than ever. The little girl leaned over her mother and patted her cheek
with one hand, while with the other she made a repelling motion toward her
father. The prisoner was led away, and as soon as the wife came to her senses
she went away with her children. When the door closed on her she stood for a
moment gazing in a dazed manner at the crowd. The people seemed to pity her.
One man took her hand and led her down the steps, and then she passed through
the crowd unmolested by either word or act. Her face was pale but calm, and
the little girl was as quiet as she had been throughout all the trying scenes,
but the boy, who clung to his mother’s skirt, was still crying bitterly.

Kenkowsky was again led back before the sergeant at the desk as soon as his
family had gone. He was then quite calm and collected. He turned to a
policeman and said in German: “I am innocent. I suppose you will let me go
home soon.”

“Why,” replied the policeman, “whether you’re guilty or not, you’ll be mighty
lucky if you get off.”

The prisoner was then asked if he would go quietly to court, and he said he
would. He was manacled, and between two policemen was marched out of the
station. His appearance was a signal for another howl from the 39 crowd, who
pressed around the party so closely that the policemen used their clubs. The
prisoner turned pale, and trembled as he had done in the station when he heard
the angry cry without. He was hustled into the coach, and as soon as the door
was closed the driver whipped up his horses, and they started off at such
speed that the crowd had to fall back. Many, however, ran after the coach
several blocks down Ninth avenue, and some boys followed it all the way to the
Jefferson Market Police Court.

40 ![](images/i026.jpg)

FINDING THE BODY OF MINA SCHMIDT, ALIAS MULLER, ALIAS KENKOUWSKY, WHERE IT HAD
BEEN LEFT BY HER HUSBAND

41 The prisoner was taken into a small room, and when court was opened he was
led before Justice Morgan. Capt. Washburn, Coroner Wiggins, Chief Donovan,
Detective Stanton, and G. A. Seide were in court. Capt. Washburn stated the
case to the Justice, and said the New Jersey authorities wished to have the
custody of the prisoner. The Justice called up Kenkowsky and asked if he knew
why he was to be taken to New Jersey. The French interpreter translated the
question, but the prisoner said he understood German better than he did
French, so the German interpreter was called in. Kenkowsky replied in the
affirmative. He further said that he knew his legal rights, but that he was
willing to go to New Jersey without any formal proceedings. The Justice then
endorsed the warrant and Capt. Washburn handed over the prisoner to Chief
Donovan. Kenkowsky’s manacles had been taken off, and he asked that he be
allowed to have his arms free. His request was granted.

Kenkowsky was then again placed in the coach, which was driven hurriedly
through West Tenth street to the Hoboken ferry and upon the ferryboat
Moonachie.

Kenkowsky’s coming had been anticipated in Hoboken, and an immense throng had
gathered at the ferry on the Hoboken side, rendering the streets leading to
the river almost impassable. As each boat reached the slip the policemen on
duty there experienced the utmost difficulty in restraining the crowd that
pressed forward eagerly in the desire to get a glimpse of the prisoner. When
at last he landed on the New Jersey shore the carriage was driven as rapidly
as possible through the multitude in the direction of Police Headquarters.
Some one in the throng recognized Chief Donovan in the vehicle and shouted to
the bystanders:

“There’s the murderer! There’s the murderer!”

The news spread like wildfire, and was received with mingled threats and
shouts of exultation. Cries of “Hang him!” “Lynch the wretch!” “We’ll fix
him!” were heard on all sides. The coach dashed up Newark street to Hudson
street, pursued by over 2,000 persons, shouting at the top of their voices.
Chief Donovan deemed it prudent to avoid the still larger crowds that swarmed
around the police station on Washington street. He therefore directed the
driver to pull up his horses at the end of an alley that led to the rear of
the building. The prisoner was conducted through this passage to the station.
He was placed in a cell at the end of the corridor.

While he was lying in jail awaiting the opening of the inquest, which42 had
been adjourned until 2 o’clock, another link in the chain of circumstantial
evidence against him was being prepared. Regina Herkfeldt, 20 years old, of
153 Newark avenue, told the police that on Monday, May 9, she went to an
intelligence office in Mott street to get a situation as a servant. There she
met a man answering Kenkowsky’s description. He engaged her to do housework,
and took her to 149 Charles street. There he locked her in a room and
assaulted her. He then led her to the street and left her. Afterward he
followed her into a saloon and took her pocketbook and a ring from her finger,
and left the saloon with them. She followed him to Thirty-fifth street and
Tenth avenue, where she lost him. Three or four days afterward the man went to
her brother’s place of business (her brother is a galvanizer in the
Pennsylvania Railroad shops), and told him that he wanted to marry the girl.
After that he went to her house and told her he would marry her, and they went
to Canal street, New York, to her sister’s house. Last Sunday the man went to
her house and told her he was going to Chicago. He said he wanted to give her
a gold watch and a ring. The watch was a lady’s hunting case gold watch, with
flowers engraved on the outside case. The inside case did not look like gold.
The ring was chased, and had one round dark blue stone set in a crown setting,
with four claws which held the stone. He would not let her keep the ring, but
said he would send her one from Chicago. He went back on Wednesday, the 18th,
and told her she must get a situation, and he would send for her from Chicago.
The girl could not remember the man’s name.

When Chief Donovan heard this story he telegraphed to Jersey City for the
girl, and she was taken to Hoboken by Detective Bowe. Kenkowsky and a number
of other persons were admitted to the large drill room of the station, and the
girl was then led in and requested to point out the man. No sooner had she
entered the apartment than she walked opposite to Kenkowsky, looked at him
steadily for an instant, and then, as she waved her umbrella toward him,
exclaimed:

“Das ist der man.”

“Ask him,” said Chief Donovan to Aid Ringe, “whether he has ever seen this
woman before.”

The aid interpreted the question and the prisoner grunted out a negative
answer.

At 2 o’clock in the afternoon, the hour appointed for the continuation of the
inquest, a great throng swarmed in Washington street between Police
Headquarters and the Morgue. Kenkowsky was led through this crowd by Chief
Donovan and an escort of policemen. The prisoner’s appearance was greeted with
the same threatening cries that had been uttered on his arrival in Hoboken,
but he bore up against the clamor with real or well-feigned indifference. When
he entered the hall and was being led to a seat at the side of the Coroner’s
chair his eyes accidentally fell upon the lay figure that had been draped with
the clothing of the murdered woman. When he saw43 it he averted his face with
a perceptible tremor. He almost immediately recovered his composure and
dropped into his seat.

The Rev. Dr. Mabon, the pastor of the Grove Reformed Dutch Church, testified:
“To the best of my knowledge I think the prisoner is the man that I married
under the name of Louis Kettler.”

Sarah Jane Rigler, who had directed the couple to Dr. Mabon’s house on May 3,
testified: “I recognize the prisoner as the man who was with the woman who
asked me where she could get a minister to marry them.”

John E. Schumann, the barber who had been called in by Dr. Mabon to witness
the ceremony, said that he believed the prisoner to be the man who was married
on that occasion.

Regina Herkfeldt testified concerning her acquaintance with Kenkowsky. She
identified a watch that was produced as the one that he gave her. On cross-
examination she considerably modified her previous account of the prisoner’s
assault upon her.

John E. Luthy, a watchmaker of 315 West Thirty-fifth street, testified that
the prisoner called at his place on May 16 with the watch and left it there,
taking a receipt for it.

Charles H. Peters, a roundsman of the Twentieth Precinct, this city, testified
to a conversation he had had with the prisoner at the station on the night of
the arrest. Kenkowsky admitted to him that he knew Mina Muller. He at first
denied but afterward confessed that he had given a watch to Luthy to have
repaired, and that it belonged to Mina Muller. He told the roundsman that
after the trunks had been taken to Christopher street, Mina proposed to him to
take a walk, and they went over to New Jersey and visited the Scheutzen Park.
They strolled into a saloon on the Guttenberg road and had some beer. After
leaving it he told her he wanted to go back to New York, and she objected. As
they were talking, two men, he asserted, came along the road. One of them said
to the woman: “Hello, Mina! what are you doing over here?” When he heard this
familiar language he turned to his companion, and said: “If you are that kind
of a woman, I’ll have nothing to do with you,” and then he parted from her,
leaving her with the two men.

While the inquest was going on the wife of the prisoner entered the room and
managed to force her way through the throng. When she turned her eyes toward
her husband she threw up her arms and fell unconscious. She was carried down
stairs to the station, where restoratives were applied.

In the evening Kenkowsky was taken to the county jail and placed in the cell
formerly occupied by Covert D. Bennett.

In the trunks in Kenkowsky’s possession was found, in addition to a lot of
female clothing, a white shirt. The sleeves from the wrists to the elbows were
spotted with blood; the bosom, too, was marked with similar stains. On each
side of the shirt at about the waist there were marks of bloody fingers. A
pair of buckskin gloves with very small spots of blood on the back was also
found; the palms were soiled, as if they had been used to handle some rough
and dusty article.44

### THE MURDERED WOMAN’S FUNERAL.

At 11 o’clock on the morning of May 20th, Martin Sanger, an undertaker,
removed the body of Mina Muller from the Hoboken Morgue and placed it in a
plain coffin, which was put in a hearse and driven to the residence of the
deceased woman’s brother, Carl Schmidt, 555 Ninth avenue. On the lid of the
coffin was a silver plate with the inscription: “Mina Muller, died May 3,
1881, aged 34 years.” A shield bearing the words “Ruhe in Frieden,” was also
on the coffin. A wreath of flowers inwoven with the dead woman’s name rested
upon the head of the coffin, surrounded by bouquets. A throng of Germans,
mostly women, were waiting in front of the house for the arrival of the body.
When the hearse appeared at about two o’clock, the sidewalks for nearly a
block were almost impassable. Vehicles blocked the street in some places, and
many men and boys had climbed upon the elevated railroad columns. Six
carriages containing the husband and brothers of the deceased woman, and the
officers of Lodge No. 70, Knights and Ladies of Honor, accompanied the hearse
to the grave in the Lutheran Cemetery. Louis Schlisenger, the president of the
lodge, read its ritual. Mr. Muller wept during the service.

Mr. Schlisenger said the Lodge would pay the sister of Mrs. Muller $1,000.
Mrs. Muller joined the Lodge several years ago. She originally assigned the
money she was entitled to as a member to her husband, but on May 3 she revoked
this and assigned it to her sister. When Mrs. Muller saw Mr. Schlisenger she
told him she was going to France, and in case of her death she desired that
her sister should receive the money.

### THE PERSON WHO CAUSED KENKOWSKY’S CAPTURE ARRESTED AS AN ACCOMPLICE.—HOW
KENKOWSKY SPENT SUNDAY.

At half-past one o’clock on the morning of May 22d, Detectives Heidelberg and
Dolan arrested Philip Emden of 414 West Thirty-ninth street, on the charge
that he was an accomplice of Martin Kenkowsky. Emden was locked up in a cell
at the Police Headquarters. In the morning, however, he was liberated. It was
said that he was arraigned at the Jefferson Market Police Court and liberated;
but on the other hand it was reported that he was not taken to court at all,
but that Captain Washburn of the Twentieth Precinct called at headquarters,
and that after a conversation the captain had with Inspector Byrnes, Emden was
liberated. The police were reticent about the procedure, but the result was
that Emden was freed.

Capt. Washburn was indignant at Emden’s arrest. He said: “Emden was the first
man to give a clue to Kenkowsky, and I promised to keep his name a secret. We
are in the habit of taking informers’ names in confidence; otherwise people
wouldn’t give us information. Prosecutor McGill also promised me that he would
not disclose the name. I think Kenkowsky’s wife found out that Emden had given
me information, and she45 tried, out of revenge, to throw suspicions on him.
Emden has lived three years in the district, and is a quiet, well-behaved man.
Chief Donovan was perfectly willing that Emden should be set at liberty. Emden
will accompany me to testify at the inquest. He certainly has not behaved like
a man who has committed a murder.”

Philip Emden was found at his house, 414 West Thirty-ninth street. According
to his statement he met Kenkowsky shortly after the latter came to this
country. Emden is a mason, and found odd jobs for Kenkowsky, who is of the
same trade. On Feb. 19 last Emden married Bertha Himmelsbach, and Kenkowsky
was one of the witnesses to the ceremony, though on the certificate his name
appears as Martin Karkowsky. Shortly after the marriage Emden was told by
Kenkowsky that Mina Muller, a friend of his, knew Bertha Himmelsbach, who, she
said, was a bad woman. This led to difficulties between Emden and his wife,
which ended in their separation on April 17. Since that time he has seen very
little of Kenkowsky, but he says that on one occasion the prisoner showed him
a gold watch and chain corresponding to those owned by Mina Muller. Emden does
not know whether this was before or after the murder.

On Thursday morning he read of the identification, and in H. Luhr’s liquor
store, 587 Tenth avenue, he mentioned that Kenkowsky had known Mina Muller.
Luhr, who knew Kenkowsky, suggested that the description of the man who was
married in Guttenberg tallied with Kenkowsky’s appearance. Emden made up his
mind to see if Kenkowsky was still at his house, 510 West Thirty-sixth street.
As his pretence for calling, he determined to say that he had a job for the
alleged murderer. He found him in bed, and, when he asked if he wanted the
job, Kenkowsky said that he was engaged as a cook in a Jewish family on Fifth
avenue, and only came home nights. After working hours, Emden went to Capt.
Washburn and informed him of his suspicions, and a policeman was sent with him
to watch the house. In front of the house they found Strang, the trunkman, who
in the meantime had been tracked by Seide. Strang asked Emden if he could
speak German, and, when the latter answered in the affirmative, requested him
to ask the German woman up stairs if a trunk he was to deliver belonged to
her, saying he had left three trunks there some time previously. Emden went up
stairs and asked Mrs. Kenkowsky if three trunks had been delivered there, and
she said they had not. When Emden came back to Strang with this answer, Strang
requested him to ask again, and this time she replied in the affirmative; and
when Strang brought up Kenkowsky’s trunk, she said, in surprise: “Why, he told
me he had taken it to where he was working in Fifth avenue.”

Kenkowsky’s wife was found at 510 West Thirty-sixth street. She had just
returned from a visit to her husband in jail. Her eyes were red as though she
had been weeping.

“Philip Emden,” she said, “has been a good friend to me and my poor little
ones. When I told my husband this afternoon in jail that Philip46 had been
arrested, he threw up his arms and exclaimed: ‘Philip arrested! Philip, who
has always been so good to us? He is innocent, Katrina, as innocent as I am
myself.”

Martin Kenkowsky spent Sunday quietly in his cell in the Hudson County Jail at
Jersey City. He ate his meals regularly and with much relish, and slept for an
hour after dinner. In the afternoon his wife and two children visited him. He
embraced them and had a long conversation with them in the presence of a
turnkey. In the course of their talk the woman charged him with having stolen
a five-dollar gold piece from her room on the evening of May 3d. That was the
day on which the murder was committed. Kenkowsky admitted that he had taken
the money. He said that after he had left Mina with the two men at Union Hill,
he returned to New York city and went home. There he found the $5 piece, which
his wife had saved, and put it in his pocket. When he was told of the arrest
of Emden he seemed to be very much surprised. He said he knew Emden, and had
become acquainted with him only a short time ago.

“But,” he exclaimed, “he is as innocent as I am.”

The prisoner referred frequently to his former narrative as to the
circumstances under which he parted with Mrs. Muller in New Jersey. He stated
that one of the two men who accosted her in the Schuetzen Park, and with whom
he says he left her, was tall, and had a red moustache, and the other was
shorter and thinner. He was convinced, he declared, that they murdered her.

City Missionary Verrinder held divine service in the corridor of the jail on
Sunday morning. Kenkowsky, at his own request, was permitted to attend the
exercises. He sat on the foremost bench, directly in front of the minister,
and although he did not understand the sermon, he bowed his head reverently
whenever the name of Jesus was uttered by the preacher. At an early hour he
went to bed, and fell asleep a few moments later.

The reader who has followed us thus far will perceive that scarcely ever in
the records of modern murder cases has such a steel coil of circumstantial
evidence, in such a small space of time, so completely woven itself around a
murderer. Kenkowsky attempted to prove an alibi by asserting that on the day
of the murder, and several hours before it could have taken place, he was on
his way to cross the river, and that on his way he had asked the direction to
the ferry of a carpenter whom he saw putting up posts for a fence. This
carpenter was found, and testified that a man on that date had asked him the
way to the ferry, but he failed to recognize Kenkowsky as that man. The bottom
of the alibi leaked, however, when the gentleman on whose property the fence
was being put up showed his diary, in which was recorded a mem. of that
particular job, dated several days after the date of the murder. What verdict
could a coroner’s jury bring in but one fastening the crime on Kenkowsky? The
trial will be read with great interest.

THE END.

![](images/i034a.jpg)

MARTIN KENKOUWSKY, ALIAS KETTLER, IN HIS CELL.

![](images/i034b.jpg)

Augustus A. Seide,  
THE JERSEY CITY REPORTER WHO SOLVED THE WEEHAWKEN MYSTERY.

* * *

Transcriber’s Note

Efforts have been taken to transcribe this work as originally published,
including inconsistent capitalization and punctuation, and alternative titles,
names and spelling, except on page 37 where “ogether” has been changed to
“together”.
